In this research, Scott employs a quantitative approach to her study. This is the best method she could choose for a comparison of this scale. She needed a large group of responses for her to analyse so that she could draw conclusions from her findings. Her research question was, "To what extent has there been a revolution in sexual attitudes and is the revolution over?" (Scott, 1998, p.818). Then, when she uses her findings as comparative data for the cross-national part of the research, the question is, "To what extent does religious difference account for the cross-national variations in attitudes?" (Scott, 1998, p.831). Both research questions were asked within the context of attitudes to pre-marital sex, extra marital sex and sex between members of the same sex. For her data collection methods, Scott uses the time series data from British Social Attitudes (BSS) and the General Social Survey (GSS) of the United States when comparing British and American attitudes. To analyse the four other nations - Ireland, Germany, Sweden and Poland she uses data from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) (Scott, 1998, p.815). Please see appendix one for some examples of the exact wording of the questions. The GSS and BSA are nation-wide probability samples of adults 18 plus and are used to aggregate and monitor social change. Response rates are normally about 70% with the lowest being 65% in 1994.
Before showing us her findings Scott gives us a little bit of background on sexual revolutions and queries whether the use of the term 'revolution' is still apt. The term 'sexual revolution', she argues is charged with meaning and does not necessarily mean an overthrow of traditional sexual morality. She notes how the emancipation of women, the introduction of the contraceptive pill, and the fact that a larger number of women are more highly educated post world war two, are all deciding factors in changing the traditional view of sexual morality. In this introduction Scott also alerts the reader to any past episodes that may affect results and/or matters that she believes may invalidate her research. Such examples are the sexual revolution of the 1960s and the awareness of AIDS in the 1980s (Scott, 1998, pp.815-6). She also accounts for these in her conclusion, "In Britain, the effects of the AIDS scare is clearly seen in the increase of disapproval [of homosexuality] from 1983 to 1987" (Scott, 1998, p.838). This shows that her analysis has taken in these variables. The discriminating variables are "gender and generation" in the first part of the study and "religion and religiosity" in the second (Scott, 1998, p.834).
Scott has a positivist epistemological position because of the nature of her questionnaires; this means that she can collate and use empirical methods to create generalisations and replication of rules that will apply to most of the population (Miller, week 2, lecture notes). Because Scott didn't actually design the structured questionnaires used for Britain and the United States it means that she could be objective in looking at the results. She also used hindsight to help explain some findings. An example of this is the respective regimes of President Regan in the States and Margaret Thatcher the Prime Minister of England in the 1980s to highlight their conservative outlook in their offices that may have had a domino effect on their laws on sexual promiscuity.
Scott's research is an interesting, worthwhile study with methodological outcomes. This is for more than one reason because she has not only looked at just one particular year, but shows changes in permissiveness in different age cohorts over a period from 1965 to 1994. She notes secularisation, religion and religiosity (how many times someone actually goes to church), sexual equality, non-marital cohabitation and children born outside of marriage as some of the reasons why increasing liberalism and open-mindedness might lead to a more relaxed attitude to the sexual climate by 1994. She realises that these may be reflected in the answers of the questionnaires (Scott, 1998, p.817). Most interesting about this study is the fact that in both Britain and America and cross-nationally extra-marital sex is always seen as the worst kind of sexual permissiveness, quickly followed by homosexuality. Women are shown to be more relaxed about homosexuality than men. In all cases, and in all age groups, pre-marital sex is seen as the least worrying of the three. Disapproval for pre-marital sex is 15% and 40% in Britain and America respectively whereas disapproval for extra-marital sex is 90% and 94% for Britain and America respectively (Scott, 1998, p.83). She does take into account that the English are more conservative in their sexual attitudes but does not discount this in her survey. For your interest I have given the mean percentage of disapproval of pre-marital, homosexual and extra-martial sex in appendix two.
In her research, Scott remarks that sexual norms are not only subject to change over time, but also are likely to change over different cultures. This is why she sees "cross-national researches [as] essential if we are to determine what attitudinal changes are common throughout the industrial Western world" (Scott, 1998, p.819). However I believe this was not done as effectively as possible as the questionnaires in Britain, the United States, West and East Germany were self-complete whereas the Swedish were asked in the mail or on the phone and in Poland and Ireland were asked the questionnaires face-to-face (Scott, 1998, p.832). Therefore some bias may have occurred in the answers since some people might put their real feelings down when not interviewed etc. Also sample numbers differ greatly, from 938 people in Ireland to as many as 2,324 in West Germany. This means that the representativeness of the sample (Devine and Heath, 1999, p.10) is perhaps not as comparable as it should be, can this really be a 'good' cross-section of society? On the other hand, Scott's interest in a cross-national comparison is also to see if region and religiosity is an important factor in sexual permissiveness, this is perhaps why she looks at Ireland since it is a strong Catholic country in contrast to Sweden which has relaxed attitudes to sex and has low levels of church attendance.
In conclusion there are many pros and cons of Scott's cross-cultural comparison. In using an inductive approach she gives many examples of generalisations such as "Despite the widespread tendency of women to be more regular church attendees than men, women are more tolerant than men of same sex relations in all six nations" (Scott, 1998, p.840). In that quote, she has noted the causal relationships between the variable of sex and the church (who believe in sex for procreational purposes). She also shows how attitudes to extra-marital sex are still seen as wrong and she actually decides not to analyse it since it is constant in all six nations. Fidelity may be the ideal, but double-standards mean that people can believe this and not put it into practice. Another problem I noticed is the difference in wording. Scott shows this herself (p.827) but notes how comparisons can be drawn between men and women; for instance, how women are less likely to condemn homosexual relationships but more likely to be opposed to pre-marital sex than men. Again she gives a possible reason for this deficit towards homosexuality. It might be because men feel the need to " condemn homosexuality in order to assert their own masculinity" because it is "rooted in [their] heterosexual prowess". Perhaps the weakest part of her argument is when she talks about data methods and analysis, she only dwells on this for a small part of the extensive article and only to talk about control variables such as educational attainment and divorce.
Scott does answer her research question about revolution in sexual attitudes and makes an insightful comment that there is "little evidence of any revolutionary change....most of the changes in attitudes towards sexual morality [are] due to the slow process of cohort replacement" (Scott, 1998, p.830) and that the generational divide is lessening over time (Scott, 1998, p.839). However, she does not make any justification about the fact that it is only a questionnaire and that 'ticking boxes' might not give you enough data to understand of why people feel the way they do. But this would have to be done in a more qualitative way which would be more time consuming and less cost effective and not give universal laws (to European countries) like this study gave. Perhaps more countries could be studied, but the countries were chosen for the fact that they might have contrastable differences on sexual morality. She also states they were chosen for "pragmatic reasons concerning data accessibility" and to "test the hypothesis of religion" (Scott, 1998, p.834). This was shown in disapproval regarding pre-martial sex between Ireland (a highly Catholic country) and Sweden (that has a liberal regime) which was 43% and 5% respectively. Her research study had given many theoretical contributions, ones which can be applied to all six nations as well as some statistics that can used to explain attitudes to sexual morality within Britain and the United States and she further gives illustrations of how it might change.
Word count: 1,487 words.