Knowledge can be defined and interpreted in a number of ways, the most common assumes it is, 'the information, understanding and skills that you gain through education or experience: practical / medical / scientific knowledge.'
 If adopting this definition and relating it to the statement above it is necessary to examine exactly who, during the Renaissance era, would have been accustomed to this kind of Knowledge. Whether it was gender specific, dependant on status or wealth and in how it was used to shape English Society.
The Renaissance era is one best known for its development and exploration of artistic, cultural and intellectual movement, and though with its roots centred firmly in Italy the influence of the renaissance reached many European countries including Britain. This was a result achieved partly due to numbers of scholars travelling from England to Italy with the intention of learning Classical literature and teaching. With the introduction of this 'new knowledge' and European influence, British society began to explore its own culture using the new and different ideas regarding the arts, science and religion.
The need to gain and challenge the ideas that create knowledge has always been fundamental to the way in which a society is able to expand; the old clich that declares knowledge is power is perhaps at the base of most societies. It is through Knowledge that economical, political and geographical gain can be achieved, factors perhaps essential to maintain law and order. The very way in which knowledge itself is valued and perceived reflects the attitudes of those in pursuit of it, it can shape an entire country indicating its possible potential or even lack there of. Perhaps it is safe to assume that Governments or Commonwealths that have failed or struggled in the past have been based on a false or superficial regard for Knowledge. That is, it has been applied to a particular set of topics which are accordingly then exposed to a particular category of people. For example, during the 15 th and 16 th Century Knowledge was considered only to be accessible by the upper class, the nobility. Wealth and status determined the type of education which was acceptable for an individual to receive; Latin and Greek, along with Mathematics and Astrology were deemed suitable subjects for most scholars. The perception of Knowledge and the way it can be defined is often restricted and confined to go along with the social norms and expectations.
However surely Knowledge can be discovered, acquired and possessed by anyone and anywhere regardless of their background or social status or wealth. Knowledge can defy time by being both simultaneously old and new depending on whom it is directed to, its very boundaries are continuously being challenged and explored. Its fluidity means that it can be manipulated to bring and take advantage in a wide range of situations and the ways in which it can be represented are countless. In both Utopia, by Sir Thomas More and Beware the Cat, by William Baldwin, Knowledge is represented and used to convey each of the texts main message or even to suggest perhaps the lack of one altogether.
The latter can be more appropriately applied to Baldwin's text. The representation of Knowledge is conveyed through the various characters which appear in the text, those in positions which assume their hold on Knowledge is secure are often made to look foolish and idiotic, whilst others who the reader would least expect to have any capacity for learning turn out to be the wisest of all. Baldwin enjoys subverting the norm and continuously challenges the conventions of the church. Beware the Cat, the first English novel, is every bit as complex as it is a satirical reflection of the time during which Baldwin was writing. The complexity of the text suggests that the various political and social views that are put across in the text should be taken seriously and would have more than likely provoked a strong reaction from contemporary readers. However the fact that they are placed deliberately side by side the comic, satiric and the absurd (and all three are extremely prominent throughout the novel) causes the reader to reassess how genuine these view points are being ascertained.
The text works on a multiple of levels, the first person narrator who not only tells his own story but five other peoples as well, gives the novel apparent depth which is subsequently dismissed with the absurdity of the events which are involved. Baldwin uses a range of genres and styles; satire, beast fable, dream vision as well as proverb and hymn, all to experiment with the very boundaries of language.
During the novel Baldwin toys with the reader, encouraging a certain reading of the text only to shift his approach to another direction, there is a constant sense of underlying movement and sense of unease for the reader not knowing what is expected of them to gain from the text. The only guidelines available to the reader are the comments that Baldwin has added through marginal notes, these enables Baldwin to both maintain his distance as the writer and also to guide the readers response, emphasising significant points in the text. These notes often occur next to some statement or declaration from Master Streamer, the designated narrator.
As mentioned earlier Streamer is an example of one of those in a position which would demand a great knowledge and understanding of life based on a sound education and intellect, he is a Divine meaning a lecturer of theology. However Baldwin is very quick to alter this perception or assumption and regularly seeks to undermine and point out the ridiculous nature of the narration. For example before the story even can begin, Streamer dedicates his introduction to the explanation and history behind the names of; Aldersgatae, Moorgate, Ludgate, Aldgate and Cripplegate. This is a wholly uncalled for, irrelevant digression that serves the reader with nothing but the impression that Streamer's character cannot be taken seriously, which is precisely what Baldwin intended.
Baldwin ensures that each time Streamer parades his clear lack of knowledge, the reader is made to more than acknowledge its presence. In the third part of the oration, Streamer declares,
He completely disregards the work of those belonging to precious generations and continues to state,
Baldwin also uses Streamers character as an object for humour and satire, again reinforcing his foolish nature and reassuring the reader that he is there for their amusement and of course as the narrator. It is during this narration that Streamer, after finishing his typically extravagant description of the process of his potion making, he goes on to narrate its result,
Throughout this excessive collection of rhyming couplets Baldwin merely adds a short and concise marginal note, 'Here the poetic fury came upon him'.(pp32) The contrast between the lengths is quite striking, clearly few words are need for Baldwin to identify the unintentional comical side of Streamers oration.
Master Streamer however, is not the only one which Baldwin uses in this way, much of his satire is directed at Religious figures, especially priests which feature regularly throughout the text. By undermining them, it is possible to see that Baldwin represents knowledge by showing those who lack it and making them appear foolish. This is apparent in the case of the Priest who tries to vanquish the devil, who is infact mistaken for Mouse Slayer, the cat,
The idea that each of the Priests holy items, intended for good, actually result in causing harm is a significant idea, it perhaps reveals Baldwin's own perception of the incapability and the inept quality of this Religious doctrine, as well as the tradition and convention that belong to it. The Priest himself is found next, in an entirely un-holy and considerably compromising position, '...his face lay upon a boy's bare arse. '(line 11 part 3, pg 49)
Though Baldwin often challenges the conventional representation of Knowledge in this way, he also manages to represent it through the role of the cats. The cats themselves often seem to have some kind of secret knowledge that places them at some advantage, at a superior position to humans. This is mainly shown through the story of Mouse Slayer and the types of humans she encounters, the old woman for instance, who keeps a brothel, is described as, 'very holy and religious.' (line 27, part 3, pg 40) Mouse Slayer seems to judge each of her owners with a kind of moral knowledge based on the cat law, which unlike human law is obeyed loyally, 'I never disobeyed or transgressed out holy law'(B.T.C line 7, part 4, pg 46). Despite even when it is oppressive and degrading towards female cats which forbids them to, 'refuse any males not exceeding the number of ten in one night.'
This perhaps suggests that despite Mouse Slayer having knowledge to judge, it does not earn her any equality amongst the males.
The fact that the law is considered holy as well also adds to the idea that these cats have more respect for their Governing body. Not only do they have a Government which appears to enforce their laws, but there is also a distinctive hierarchy among them. Streamer hears the cats use titles such as, 'Lord' and, 'Chief Councillor' as well as, 'Assistant'. Indeed, Baldwin applies many humanistic qualities to the cats and it is apparent that their society is meant to be compared to human society.
Beware the Cat is on the whole a clearly satirical novel of English Government, its justice system, and also of the Church, representing the knowledge which lies behind these institutions.
In this way there is a considerable difference between Beware the Cat and Thomas More's, Utopia. More's main motivation and message lacks the humour and mocking tone that Baldwin adopts, instead opting for a far more grounded and critical evaluation of British society and culture. It is an exposure of the corrupt condition of the English state. However both texts share the same association of Knowledge through the language of Latin. Associating Knowledge with Latin was very common during the Renaissance, it was the essential language to learn for scholars, or individuals who wished to improve their social status. Streamer uses Latin in his narration to appear knowledgeable but does so incorrectly and out of context, therefore once more looking like the fool. Baldwin is reinforcing that knowledge is often misused by those who don't understand it. More originally wrote Utopia entirely in Latin; it wasn't until 1851 that it was translated into English. This perhaps is why Utopia appears quite a direct and simplistic text with the structure of a compare and contrast technique, using one idealistic fantasy setting against the back drop of reality. In regards to the representation of Knowledge, Utopia is based on it its discovery.
More introduces the character, Raphael Hythloday, the imaginary traveller, to take the reader to the imaginary world of Utopia. Hythloday is an explorer and his entire purpose is to travel in the hope of discovering these new worlds and the knowledge they contain. This is perhaps reflective of what was actually happening in Britain during the tine of writing, and what Andrew Hadfield calls, 'early modern English travel and colonial writing.'
 During the time of publication, Britain was undergoing a period of, 'serious interest in colonial expansion.'(pg 11). Therefore Hadfield draws the conclusion that the Utopians are in fact another version of the English who have to deal with the exact same problems that feature in the reality.
Through Hythloday's discoveries, there is a sense of uncovering a new Knowledge, he tells the fictional More and the reader that this can be used to deepen and extend an individuals knowledge even further.
However whereas More believes that this Knowledge should be used to Council and advise those who have the power to change and influence legislation, Hythloday strongly disagrees which in turn provokes a mild argument with neither of the parties accepting the others view when it concludes. Though Hythloday feels it is necessary for him to pass on his discovery of Utopia and the Utopian knowledge and culture,
He does not wish to indulge those who would not listen to him. He perceives the Courts as constructed of sycophants and flatterers,
Again, whilst telling More about his meeting with the Cardinal and his advisors, he recalls how they would only approve of his ideas when the Cardinal had voiced his opinion,
Reinforcing the idea that Knowledge can only gain its credibility once it has been passed from someone with status or influence, its value can only be ascertained once the status of its speaker is known.
On the opposite side to Hythloday, More is quite clearly in favour of using knowledge to advise and council. This is perhaps not surprising as More, the author, did in fact become a councillor at the court of Henry VIII, so would naturally have had a more accurate perception of how the courts worked. The More in the text tries to encourage Hythloday,
After more of less agreeing to disagree Hythloday moves on to give a greatly detailed description of Utopia, its history and culture. In Utopia knowledge is regarded rather highly in fact it is considered one of the highest pleasures for the mind,
'In intellectual pursuits they are tireless. '(pp 566) Education is clearly an essential part of their society, they ensure that every child, 'man and woman alike' (pp 560) receive a good introduction to literature and spend their leisure time reading.
However though the Society of Utopia appears to be based on equality, there is no class system as such, everyone is treated the same, infact this is almost to the point where there is a danger of losing identity or individuality, it is very clear that there is still a division between those who have practical knowledge and those who have intellectual knowledge. For example if a craftsmen or labourer,
The use of, 'relieved' and, 'promoted' is quite significant, it suggests that the manual work is a chore or burden which can only be relieved entering into a far more superior and worthier class of intellectuals. Knowledge here is being represented as something which is only valuable or worthy when it is based on scholarly level and not a manual or practical one.
Again though there appears to be no class division, this is not entirely accurate, similarly, the reader learns that men and women are equals with equal educational opportunities, yet toward the end of the text a strong image of a woman being a figure of negative, corruptible influence is identified. Hythloday personifies Pride as a woman,
To conclude both More and Baldwin have carefully constructed their texts on the basis to influence or provoke a response from their readers which aligned to their own. This is not in the least unique or exclusive to Renaissance texts in particular, but is found in almost every literary work. However, what defines them as individual is the way in which the represent knowledge to reinforce, emphasise or articulate a view point or character/stereotype, which in turn is praised or undermined. Knowledge can be represented in vast number of ways, and this is what is found amongst Baldwin and Moore's texts. It is clear that these authors were aware of how knowledge can be valued and credited on a number of factors. Its whole credibility and validity is dependant on who is using it. Knowledge, it seems, is at the basis of inequality in these texts and even during the Renaissance era and beyond. It was dependant on class and specific to gender, it was confined to the upper, wealthier social elite and excluded from the lower class masses who were obviously deemed unsuitable or unworthy to be exposed to any level of intellectual education.
The Renaissance was certainly a time for knowledge, if knowledge can be restricted to time that is. There were colonial expansions, discoveries of new lands, new people and inevitably new knowledge. It was a time of development and a chance to challenge old conventions and traditions, breaking away from ancestral knowledge and striking out into the unknown. It is this picture, this representation of knowledge that can be found at the foundation of Renaissance literature.