During the Victorian era women were considered to be suitably inferior to men; physically, intellectually and even spiritually. They were perceived as being merely driven by emotion and not reason. In this sense, women who had to work were paid less than men, and those who didn't work at all were reliant on a husband, a father or perhaps some generous male relative for any financial support. Women were victims of this patriarchal society and perhaps this is why Barbara Bodichon states so strongly that women held no importance or status in Victorian society, other than dutifully fulfilling the role of wife and mother and becoming the property of the their husbands. Bodichon herself was a victim of this society's rules and expectations regarding women, yet she did not submit herself or conform to them, rather Bodichon challenged and confronted, campaigning for women's rights and even set up the first women's suffrage committee 1866. Strong women like Bodichon were voicing their protests throughout the Victorian period and this has been reflected in much of the literature written during this time. The typical stereotype of a woman was starting to change, or at least writers were beginning to challenge the original idea and develop it further. This was not particularly drastic or noticeable initially but it does suggest that people were aware that women were potentially just as powerful as men, if given the chance. Yet more commonly found amongst the presentation of female characters or voices are those that were controlled or dominated by men. It is possible to identify this portrayal of women from a range of genres, including poetry as well as in the novel. Robert Browning's dramatic monologues are especially good indications of this, such as, My Last Duchess, and, Porphyria's Lover; Charles Dickens' novel, Great Expectations, also offers examples of women who are conforming to both the explicit and implicit conventions of their gender.
Both My Last Duchess and Porphyria's Lover are in the form of dramatic monologues, a technique often attributed to Browning. Though Browning by no means invented the form, he has made a significant impact upon it by using it in such an extensive and varied way. It was certainly a popular and continuously developing form amongst the Victorians. It gave the opportunity for the writer to temporarily separate themselves from their work, giving a voice to someone else, conveying instead not their own personal thought and feelings but another, usually that of a famous character in History. The monologue provides the writer with a position where they can remain detached with almost an escape from responsibility for the content. Through this detachment the poet can still subtly persuade the reader and influence their opinions.
The form of My Last Duchess is kept incredibly regular with 28 rhyming couplets. Yet due to the enjambment where each line seems to just flow onto the next, Browning makes sure the rhyme is there for emphasis only and not to provide a regular rhythm. This gives the tone of the poem a conversational one, which is in fact exactly the intention Browning want to create. Especially as that is what is occurring during the poem. A Duke is having a conversation with a visitor to his palace, recalling the memory of his previous wife, the memory of her triggered by her portrait. The portrait itself is an item that belongs to the Duke but it is clear through his recollection of the Duchess that she too was just a possession to him. The very opening line of the poem, 'That's my last Duchess...' (1)
 indicates this idea of possession, and the reader is already beginning to wonder just how many predecessors did she have? The possibility of their being more than one is probably quite accurate, and this creates the impression that these women were easily disposable to the Duke, they are devalued. This reflects perfectly the materialistic, obsessive nature of the Duke, who wants to possess not only material possessions but also a human being. This obsessive nature is the trigger for spurring his jealously when he believes her to be flirting and believes her to be,
He is even angered by the idea that she does not value his heritage or perhaps more specifically, '...nine-hundred-years old name' (33). His compulsion to own her and control her is even noticeable through the structure of the poem. As mentioned earlier, the entire monologue is based around the rhyming couplets; there is not one deviation or exception from this. It is utterly controlled, just like she is. His power over her is reflected in the poem, and once the reader becomes aware of this Browning reveals how the Duke finally rids himself of a wife altogether,
This sinister line reinforces the Dukes attitude that if he cannot own her, then no man shall, though what he does not understand is that no human life can ever be 'owned'. There is such a clear lack of spontaneity or passion in his actions, the fact that he just gave a command and the deed was done makes the crime even more cold hearted. It also demonstrates the Duke's corrupt use of this power; here perhaps Browning is condemning this corruption amongst the courts. This is the reason too that the reader disregards the Duke's point of view, and supports and sympathises with the Duchess, acknowledging her innocence. The Last Duchess is a clear example of how a woman was perceived as an object or an item to be possessed. She is only ever mentioned through her portrait, she is never given a name or any kind of identity. There is certainly a clear consequence from this treatment, though it only appears to effect her, the Duke seems to be void of any consequence or moral conscience, he feels no remorse for his actions.
Porphyria's Lover is a similar example of the above. Just as in My Last Duchess, Browning uses the structure of the form to convey the narrator's feelings and thought. The stanzas contain 8 syllables with a repeated rhyme scheme of A, B, A, B, B. However the extra line seems to turn what could be a straightforward rhythm into a slightly out of synch one which creates the tone of someone truing to convince or persuade the audience or reader. This clearly does not have the desired effect on the reader; the male narrator remains nameless making it harder for the reader to relate or trust him, regardless of it being in the first person. Instead Porphyria has the stronger identity, and although she is the victim, she holds the authority over the entire poem.
This lack of trust in the narrator becomes even more inevitable when the reader learns of how Porphyria is killed by her lover,
Indicating such a profound mental instability, his mental state is horribly disillusioned. There is a strong sense of denial and refusal to accept the reality after Porphyria's death. He believes that her cheek, 'blushed bright' (48) when he kisses her. It appears that in his world, he can immortalise Porphyria through her death, capturing her in the moment when she belongs just to him,
Just as the Duke wants to do, when he refers to her painting, '...as if she were alive' (2.)
Again the reader is introduced to this idea of ownership and male authority, 'That moment she was mine' (36) he does not hesitate to speak for her, assuming he knows her mind, what she is thinking and feeling.
These two dramatic monologues by Browning depict a male's notion of possessing a female. The male characters in these texts, 'objectify, use and abuse' the woman by forcing their own wishes upon her. Yet in both cases the men who do so do not achieve the approval or acceptance of the reader. Instead it seems to have the opposite effect, perhaps Browning, through the disguise of another voice is indeed condemning this view and asking the reader to do the same. This would suggest that the typical role of women as the property of men was being implicitly challenged. However though the poems reveal and suggest a little about the way gender was constructed and perceived amongst the Victorians, Browning does not explicitly suggest any concept regarding the 'office' of a woman, apart from the Duchess which only applies to Bodichon's idea that the only important office for women was that of sovereignty. To explore Bodichon's statement further, it is necessary to use a more in-depth and complex text which provides the content and examples of several female characters to analyse.
In Dickens novel, Great Expectations, it is possible to find a range of typical female stereotypes alongside those who don't quite achieve the expected social norms of the time. The simplest division between them appears to be class. Miss Havisham and her protg Estella who are upper class with considerable wealth or in fact as Pip describes as, '...immensely rich'
 whereas Biddy and Mrs Joe Gargery are clearly amongst those classified as the working class. This distinction separates the characters into pairs, but actually each woman is entirely different, each having an equally significant effect on Pips life. This could be due to the absence of a strong male role model, which Mr. Joe Gargery just doesn't quite fulfil. Dickens describes him as a,
Not quite the character that can easily stand and battle against the strong, dominating figure of Mrs. Joe. It is not surprising therefore that Pip regards Joe as , '...a larger species of child...' (Chp 2, pg7). Indeed there is a significant lack of any kind of strong male role model or any tender maternal one for that matter, in Pip's life.
Mrs. Joe's very introduction and description to the reader makes a striking contrast to Joe's and immediately implies that she is a woman who is so very unnaturally destined for the position as wife and mother,
There is a clear reluctance coming from her character which screams her refusal to conform to Societies norms of female duties,
This is such an unlikely and unconventional depiction of the stereotyped female role, though it is not just in her appearance where the reader discovers this abnormality, indeed in her treatment of Pip and Mr. Joe this can be seen. Mrs. Joe has a strikingly violent nature, Pip mentions that he was, 'brought up by hand' and by this, the reader acknowledges that this refers to some kind of physical abuse, confirmed when, 'Tickler' is revealed to be a stick with which he is beaten. Joe too is not exempt from this, indeed once Pip has a beating; Joe is likely to receive one as well,
The role that Mrs. Joe seems to perform throughout most of the novel is the one usually taken upon the man of the household. It was seen as the norm, during the Victorian era that men should be the dominant authoritative figures in the home and were the ones who were violent and inflicted abuse.
Dickens does the same with the character of Mrs. Havisham, another female who does not fit the 'model woman' of a Victorian society. She does not marry, (though not without trying), and she is never a mother, or at least not in a biological sense, as she does eventually adopt Estella. The very symbols of marriage, have actually become symbols of death,
Miss Havisham is an isolated, solitary female who is imprisoned within her own home, within her own memory of the past. Decay and death seem to seep straight from her, as if she were indeed a corpse. Her pure hatred for men is so overpowering that she recruits Estella, a young and impressionable girl who soon learns that she is required to avenge this withered elderly woman, and reward her with the satisfaction of seeing someone else suffer the same heartbreak as she did. Miss Havisham spends her time destroying the innocence of a child, Pip, encouraging him to abandon his world with Joe and the forge and instead watches him develop a hunger for the refined upper class he perceives as the only way of capturing Estella's cold heart. This portrayal of a woman who did not achieve the expectations of society is far from being, in any way a positive one, Dickens seems to be constantly reiterating the idea that those who do not achieve the norm do not lead a stable, happy life. Therefore it would seem Bodichon's statement would coincide with Dickens view, that women cannot achieve any kind of high office unless it is sovereignty itself, simply due to the fact that if any other path is sort after, the result is not a favourable one.
Indeed this is reflected once more upon another of Dickens's female characters, Estella. Just as Pip is very much an object in the eyes of Miss Havisham, Mrs. Joe and Estella, she too is also objectified by Miss Havisham. Estella's very identity is stolen from her; she is shaped and moulded into the creature which Miss Havisham desires. Dickens never reveals what Estella actually looks like, instead only supplying the reader with the vague and superficial, she is, 'beautiful and self possessed.'(Chp 8, pg 55). Even when Estella grows into a woman, Miss Havisham still retains an overwhelmingly obsessive control over her,
However though she is controlled, Estella most certainly controls Pip. Her influence over him is enormous, even after their first meeting Pip feels entirely differently about himself, realising for the first time that he is,
Estella, like Miss Havisham is in a position of wealth, and therefore power. She is a strong female but who also does not conform to the norm. Her control and power over Pip is illustrated by the ease in which she lowers Pip's opinion of himself and of his most beloved relative and friend, Joe. He feels continuously degraded and worthless when in her presence, even when she kisses him, a gesture of affection is turned sour and rendered meaningless,
Estella's affect on Pip provides a most significant contrast when placed alongside the character of Biddy. Like Pip, Biddy was an orphan and again, like Pip, she was, 'brought up by hand'. Biddy is instrumental in the early education of Pip; she teaches him humility and respect for Joe and most importantly the true meaning of a loyal friendship. In this sense Biddy is already showing signs of a new type of woman in Victorian society, one which is in no position of wealth but regardless is still in the position to be respected and admired and who is intellectually equal to that of a man. The way in which Pip is immediately at ease and is himself is also quite a contrast to when he is in the company of Estella. Pip describes Biddy as, '...never insulting, or capricious; she would have derived only pain, and no pleasure, from giving me pain.' (Chp 17, pg131)
There is a noticeable change with Biddy's appearance within the novel, initially when Biddy is running her Grandmother's shop Dickens portrays her with,
Yet when Biddy moves on from the shop and takes on the role as carer for Mrs. Joe, Joe and Pip, Dickens makes sure the reader acknowledges the change,
Dickens here is perhaps being rather subtle; when Biddy begins to start taking on the normal position expected of her as a woman, her appearance instantly grows more attractive and acceptable. Indeed this is not the only dramatic change the reader will notice occurring within other female characters. After surviving her brutal attack, Mrs. Joe completely reverts to a more normal gender role, '...her temper was greatly improved and she was patient.' (Chp 16, pg 122).
To conclude, it would appear that what Dickens is suggesting is that for those women who do not conform to the explicit and implicit expectations of society, instead choosing the reverse of their gender roles, the result is simply violence and chaos. This disorder is soon resolved when there is a return to the norm. In this respect it is possible to understand that amongst early Victorian society and literature, there was a very fixed understanding of how each gender should behave, and what positions in society are acceptable to them. Within the poetry of Browning these gender norms appear to be challenged, and perhaps confronted in order to raise awareness of the possibility of equality amongst men and women. Where Browning is aware of this possibility, Dickens seems very much convinced that the conception of the 'ideal woman' is there to guide those women in Victorian society to ensure they do not deviate, and experience the consequences deviation could incur. Barbara Bodichon most likely is reflecting an entirely accurate portrayal of how the Victorians perceived women and the attitude which was held against them. However to say that there is no important office for woman apart from that of Sovereign is perhaps a little closed minded, it suggests that the role of a wife or that of a mother is inferior and holds no status, where in fact it is perhaps the most essential to not only family, but to society as well.