There are various social relationships in health and social care. Partnerships are just one of these relationships. It is necessary to be aware that there are different definitions of partnership (Bury, 2004). I will define partnership as a shared understanding and control over a situation; where there are two people involved whose roles are of equal importance. Partnerships between health care professionals enable the sharing of knowledge, ways of working, strengths, skills and resources (Reynolds, 2005). Partnerships benefit patients as treatment becomes based on the most beneficial specialism (Thompson, 1986). Partnerships between colleagues enable communication and practice to be cooperative, respectful and productive. Other partnerships involve the patient or client and their family. In order that the relationship between the health care professional and the client is a partnership it needs to be based on client centred practice (Reynolds, 2005).
Traditionally relationships between clients and professionals have been based on high doctor power and control and low patient power and control (Parsons, 1951). This type of relationship depends on distinct and unequal roles of the health care professional and the client (Iphofen and Poland, 1998). The client is expected to be passive and do as they are told. Research has suggested that this relationship does not have positive results and a shift has occurred towards tailoring intervention to what the client needs (Morgan, 2003). Patients are being seen as active or expert and therefore need to be fully involved in the intervention process (Bury, 2004). In 2001 the Department of Health paper 'Shifting the Balance' stated "partnership increases patient satisfaction, reduces anxiety and improves understanding of personal needs as well as improving trust and facilitating better relationships with professionals" (p5, Department of Health (DoH), 2001). Partnerships allow for interventions to be negotiated, rather than imposed (Thompson, 2002). Rogers (1965) argued that therapists were much more effective when facilitating the client's own problem solving, through client centred practice, than when dictating to the client.
A partnership approach implies a shared definition of health and well-being. If the client and the professional have different perspectives they would not be able to work in partnership. Yet, in practice, different models exist which emphasise different causes of ill health. These models predominantly fall into three categories: Medical, Social and Biopsychosocial. The Medical model is based upon the westernised ideas of treatment and cure. It is sometimes referred to as a negative concept of health; the individual is regarded as healthy when not 'suffering' from a particular illness or disease (Baggott, 1998). In this definition the individual is the problem and it is the health care professional who needs to implement the cure (World Health Organisation (WHO), 2001). The biomedical model does not take into account the individuals psychological well-being or the social circumstances that surround the individual. The Social model on the other hand places the blame on society. If the professional were to believe in the social model of health they would be likely to try and change society rather than the individual (WHO, 2001).
The Biopsychosocial model takes a more holistic approach, by combining the Biomedical and Social models with the psychology of the individual. It supports the view that illness is complex and multi causal (Reynolds 2005). If the health care professional believes in the Biopsychosocial model they will need to look at the client as an individual in society. This supports the view of Maslow (1999) that psychological well-being and health can only be achieved if the individual is involved in making decisions about their life. In fact many health care professionals believe that medical problems cannot be understood without insight into the patient as a person (Thompson, 1986). The Biopsychosocial model which encompasses client centred practice supports the ethics behind many health care professions, for example Occupational Therapists whose ethos is that 'Occupational Therapy enables people to achieve health, well-being and life satisfaction' (COT, 20051), not just an absence of ill health. The College of Occupational Therapists (COT) code of ethics states that therapists should be committed to client centred practise (COT, 20052).
If the health care professional based their practice on the Biomedical model. They would emphasise how illness is exogenous and how the client can do little except to comply with medical advice (Gwyn, 2002). Compliance means submission to the health care professional rather than working in partnership (Walker et al, 2004). Lay definitions of health are seen to be irrelevant in this kind of practice and communication of them is not encouraged (Bury, 2004). This lack of communication is likely to have self perpetuating effect. The client may feel unable to discuss any dissatisfaction or to ask questions about what they do not understand whilst the health care professional may believe that clients do not want the information as they are not asking for it (Ley, 1988). A further effect is that the health care professional would also have no idea of the patient's views or previous knowledge and their understanding of the need to comply. Ley (1988) explored the relationship between understanding, memory and compliance and found that if the client understood they were not only more likely to comply but they were more likely to remember what they had decided to do.
There are many influences on the health care professionals' perspective of health. Influences can be at the level of the profession, as I have illustrated by looking at Occupational Therapy, the organisation or individual. Constraints to reconsidering perspectives at the level of the individual can be that professionally they are scared of losing their power and authority. Or, that working in partnership and encompassing client centred practise will put too much pressure on them in terms of time and resources (Reynolds, 2004). Furthermore, they may be threatened by criticisms that they do not know what they are doing if they allow the client to have too much control. Many also feel that they do not have the ability to work in a client centred way (Walker et al, 2004).
Constraints to change at the level of the organisation may be that the organisation has always worked in a particular way (Wilkins et al, 2001). Many interventions are still service rather than client led (Bury, 2004). The DoH policy of a single assessment process (SAP) has meant there is one method of assessment for everyone (Klee, 2005). This makes client centred practice impossible. On the other hand different DoH policies focus on the process of the health care professional empowering the client and that change has to come from within the NHS (DoH, 2001). In the paper on the Expert Patient the DoH illustrates how important partnership is and how the health care professional needs to ensure the patient has sufficient knowledge to be able to self manage their condition (DoH, 2001). The DoH clearly believes that in this situation the health care professional has the control. In these situations it is the ideological framework that needs to change (Bury, 2004). The traditional biomedical approach is being challenged but it has not been eliminated.
In some respects it does not matter whether there is an actual definition of health and well-being as long as there is a shared understanding of what they mean to the client (Sumsion, 2000). This shared understanding may mean that the client feels it best if the doctor has the power. It is important to be aware that whilst client centred approaches are desirable, not all clients welcome them (Biley, 1992). Some patients are so accustomed to the biomedical model of health care and may feel that they do not feel they have any relevant knowledge or skills (Walker et al, 2004). In some cases the client may welcome increased communication, but not go as far as to be involved in problem solving. Some individuals may simply be too ill to participate in a partnership (Biley 1992). They may just desire that the health care professional tells them what to do (Hong et al, 2000). This lack of participation can mean the client is not empowered or in control of their health care. Control will help the client to develop the intrinsic strength they need to be mentally as well as physically healthy (Maslow, 1999).
When empowered clients can take responsibility for their own health, pursue their individual goals and are more likely to comply with the intervention (DoH, 2001). However, there are problems with the term empowerment. Empowerment implies that the health care professional has the power and is giving it to the client. Therefore another way of looking at this is as locus of control. If an individual has an external locus of control they are likely to believe that the way to get better is by following doctors orders (Banyard, 2002). These health beliefs are sometimes called illness cognitions (Ogden, 2004). Illness cognitions are a set of beliefs the individual has about the causes and consequences of ill health. It is clear that health is intrinsic to the individual (Ley, 2002). The health care professional needs to understand this to be able to work in partnership. In some situations working in partnership may simply mean working in a client centred way and allowing the client to be passive.
The opposite situation to this is where the health care professional becomes much less active. This occurs in situations where the health care professional does not have the expert skills. A good example of this is in chronic conditions. The concept of the 'expert patient' has been developed and it is accepted that that in many situations patients know more about the condition than doctors. This may result in the doctor relinquishing some support (Scramber, 1997). A solution to this passivity on the part of the health care professional could be that they learn from or with the client and bring in their professional opinion on areas such as research or medications. The health care professional has a key role in ensuring safe practise (Hong et al, 2000). In some situations it may be challenging to work in partnership; the clients' idea of what they want may be more harmful than beneficial and may actually not be what they need (Sumsion, 1999). In situations such as the expert patient the individual needs an internal locus of control to believe they have the ability to influence their own health.
Partnerships can be based on various or distinct roles, for example in the case of the expert patient where the client is a key decision maker in the treatment process. This role is in direct contrast with the role of clients who may be too ill to participate. The key in a partnership is that these roles are negotiated and skills are applied to make practice client centred. It is through communication that the health care professional receives the feedback essential for the client to develop their full potential in the partnership. Maslow (1999) refers to this as self actualisation. As an Occupational Therapist I hope to achieve transcendence by enabling my clients to achieve their full potential (Maslow, 1999). Whilst working in partnership in this way the clients can help me to achieve my full potential as a Therapist.
Effective communication is crucial in all the situations I have described. The DoH is committed to the importance of developing communication skills in all its employees (DoH, 2001). Communication is essential in forming a partnership (Fitzpatrick, 2003). Intervention depends upon the success of the communication and whether the health care professional and client come to an agreement about the meaning of the symptoms and the best method of treatment (Stimson and Webb, 2001). The client needs to communicate personal knowledge and skills, social support and aspirations whereas, the professional will need to communicate expert knowledge and treatment options in a client centred way (Swain et al, 2004). The professional may also need to tailor their vocabulary (Ley, 1988). Or, even adopt different communication styles with different clients (Banyard, 2002). In some conditions it is actually part of the illness that makes it difficult for people to remember or understand what is being said to them (Ley, 1988). This needs to be appreciated.
The professional must be careful not to overwhelm the client with too much information if it is not what they need (Ley, 1988). Instead they need to tailor support to what the client needs whether it is emotional or informative. The professional needs to be able to understand the patient's verbal and non-verbal communication in order to do this, even if the client is unable to express his or her needs or thoughts clearly. It is this feedback that will allow the intervention to be client centred.
Active listening will also provide feedback. The first stage of the intervention process for Occupational Therapy involves interviewing and assessing. The therapist needs to listen in order to understood what is being said and meant. They then need to confirm that they have heard and understood what was said and meant (Thompson, 2002). Non-verbal communication, in particular body language and eye contact can play a key role in building rapport and confirming active listening (Banyard, 2002). The therapist can then, in partnership with the client, find creative methods of intervention that are useful and meaningful (Klee, 2005).
Preparation and a professional yet approachable manner are important in the interview (Cottrel, 2003). It may be necessary to structure the conversation in order to gain accurate information (Williams, 2000). Whilst an over structured interview can mean people do not feel free to disclose information. Semi-structured interviews are often a solution. Semi-structured interviews allow some narrative which can provide therapy and insights into the lived experience of the individual, without letting the individual wander into inaccuracies in order to tell a good story (Williams, 2000). The most important thing is to make the interview a two way process, in which both people are comfortable and working in partnership (Thompson, 2002). The thoroughness and accuracy of the interview will have a direct bearing on the quality of the intervention (Thompson 1986). Communication needs to continue throughout the intervention, and feedback and reflection are needed in order that the relationship remains a partnership.
The challenges to effective communication are similar to those of working in partnership, time pressures, departmental policies, health care professional's beliefs as well as the intrinsic beliefs or illness cognitions or the patient (Reynolds, 2005). Clients who have an external locus of control may be particularly difficult to communicate with as they may accept no responsibility. In the case of clients with mental health conditions communication can be particularly challenging, in particular ensuring understanding. In situations where clients have hearing difficulties or language barriers exist alternative means of communicating may need to be considered (Reynolds, 2005). In all these situations the challenge to the health care professional is to maintain professional practise and work in partnership, even if that means working with the client's family or another professional with the relevant skills, to ensure practise is client centred.
In my subset at university we completed a series of interviews (Appendix One). I found the feedback extremely useful. The feedback that I received was that I maintained poor eye contact which made group members feel I was not listening and also inhibited my ability to develop a good rapport. Clients may feel the health care professional does not want to work in partnership (Reynolds, 2005). I could easily find myself in this situation as eye contact is essential in showing a belief in partnership. In many cases it is the therapist who needs to lead the change to client centred practise (Brown, 1995). I therefore need to develop my skills in non verbal communication, in particular maintaining eye contact. I can also tailor my skills in leadership to encourage working in partnership.
A further area I have realised the importance of, whilst working in my subset, is the importance of developing a good social relationship. Sally French discusses that poor interpersonal skills and reluctance to share power can be one of the main criticisms given to therapists (2004). Sometimes I may not be as client centred, as I desire, because I am trying to be too professional or have too much control over the situation so that the client does not do something unsafe. In my subset at university I have noticed that I tend to be the person who organises or leads the group. I need to be prepared and willing to share power and to work in partnership.
Further research into defining and establishing partnerships needs to be done (Bury, 2004). Within my subset there were different definitions of partnership. Client centred practise also means different things to different people (Sumsion, 2000). Definitions and ideology need to be agreed. If we want to move into an era where adults take greater control of their lives, we need to enable them to manage their own health without risk (DoH, 2005). Research implies that it is the NHS and its employees that have the 'power to empower' clients. Health care professionals need to ensure that they are doing this in a way that suits the client's needs whether they are social, psychological or physical. As an Occupational Therapy Assistant I feel this exactly suits the role I am employed to do. Sumsion (1999) has argued that client centred practice provides the formula and framework to allow disciplines such as Occupational Therapy to be both holistic and unique to the client. Partnerships and Communication are essential and intrinsic to client centred practice.
Sian Williams. 04072037. 24th November 2005