When modern medicine was established in the nineteenth century it was based upon the premise that illness was caused by diseases attacking the body. Health was believed to be the absence of disease. Health care was therefore based almost entirely upon the conceptualisation of health as a biological state of being. Society as a whole and the individual in particular were believed to have little or no influence over health, illness or disability. This placed the responsibility and control over health and illness within the medical profession. This view of health has since been described as the medical model.
In the twentieth century sociologists and psychologists began to challenge the medical model of health. They suggested that health is influenced by society and the individual as well as biology. Sociology and psychology explained not only the effects of society and the individual on health but through scientific studies developed theories which explained the experience of health and the effects of illness, disability and service delivery on the individual. By examining how particular theories apply to practise I will demonstrate how sociology and psychology can help the health care professional to understand the effects of illness and service delivery on the individual.
There are various different definitions of health, illness, disability and service delivery. For the purpose of this essay I will define health in terms of the Social model and use the definition provided by the World Health Organisation (WHO) which is that "Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well being and not merely an absence of disease or infirmity" (WHO, 1946). Therefore illness is the absence of either physical, mental or social well being. Throughout this essay I have used the example family I have illustrated in the appendix to support my arguments and to relate theory to practise.
Whilst there are some clear distinctions between psychology and sociology: Sociologists aim is to "... understand the individuals place in the world, where they are, what they do and what their views are" (p1 Iphofen and Poland, 1998); Whereas Psychologists study behaviour and the "thoughts feelings and motivations underlying such behaviour" (The British Psychological Society, 2005). There are also many similarities Sociology also looks at the individual's interpretation of their bodily experience (Nettleton, 1995) and psychology studies the individual within a social context (Walker et al 2004). Theories of both Sociology and psychology can be used to explore the effects of illness and service delivery on the individual. The theories I will use are those which explore roles, self concept, control, socialisation, attitudes to being ill, locus of control, doctor patient relationships and culture.
Sociologists and psychologists both study social roles. A social role defines the "part we are playing" in society (p39 Iphofen and Poland 1998). Roles can become part of who we are, for example the role of a mother or father can be what the individual believes defines who they are. Roles are developed through socialisation. Socialisation usually occurs in the home, school and leisure environments but can continue to be developed in adult life during work (Iphofen and Poland 1998). According to Goffman (1959) part of a person's self concept is determined by their social roles. Irving Goffman is a sociologist however his work has been used to within the field of health psychology.
Illness can interfere with the ability of the individual to continue previous social roles. This can affect ones sense of self and result in a loss of identity (Walker et al 2004). For example in the family Rosa has lost her husband. To Rosa family are very important, she considered her role of house wife to be part of who she was. Now she has lost that role her self concept is affected she is finding it difficult to know who she is. Walter (1996) proposes that a person who has experienced a loss needs to reconstruct their identity. Shultz et al have found that how the whole family support the care giver has the most affect on the experience of bereavement upon the individual care giver than other factors (Shultz et al, 1997). They also found that negative effects were greater among spouses than other family members. Rosa did not have anyone within her family to rely on which means she was not able to prepare for bereavement. Shultz et al (1997) suggest that when the individual is supported to care for someone who is chronically ill they do not experience such a strong sense of loss or bereavement.
Freda's roles have also been affected by illness but in this situation it is her own illness that has affected her roles. For Freda the effects of illness upon her has meant that she cannot continue her roles of work, being a wife or participating in society. The health care professional working with Freda would need to understand the importance of these roles to her and work with her to try to maintain or reengage with some of these roles. Iphofen and Poland (1998) believe that our relationship between ourselves and the environment is mediated by our roles. Freda's roles have effectively been removed from her so her relationship to her environment is poor as is her concept of who she is which was largely based upon her role. George's life on the other hand is dominated by his relationship between himself and his environment is controlled by his role as a drinker. George is used to being seen as a drinker if he stops drinking then he would need to redefine who he is.
When people are unable to continue their roles due to illness they may take on the sick role. Parsons (1951), one of the founding fathers of sociology, believes that by taking on the sick role the individual is exercising an approved way of experiencing illness. If people are playing the sick role then they are not expected to act as normal. They must seek professional help to get better. McNamara (2001) believes that an ill person will function and think differently than when they are healthy. For example each person will have a unique set of circumstances that will alter their own conceptions of self and their own ability to make autonomous decisions. The sick role is their to provide a guideline of how to behave. Melvin has taken on the sick role in part by going to seek professional advice. This is called an illness behaviour and is performed to help the individual to get well. However, Melvin has not changed his diet or exercise as advised. Psychology can help to explain why Melivin has done this by looking at his 'locus of control' and schema.
Walker (1996) has found that the individual's locus of control is dependent upon their situation for example you may believe that a headache is your own fault but that abdominal pain is a matter for the doctor (p81 Walker et Al). Rotter (1966) first described the concept of locus of control. Individuals with an external locus of control do not feel that they are in control of their health and that is affected by others or chance; whereas those with an internal locus of control feel that they are in control of their health (Rotter, 1996). In this sense an individual who believes their own health is the responsibility of others would perceive a health care professional as having total power and control over their ill health. Whereas if they thought that it was down to chance then they would probably feel that nothing anybody could do would influence their ill health. This may mean they do not bother to try and influence their own ill health or to visit the doctor or follow his advice. Melvin does not feel that his high blood pressure is his own fault and or that it is within his control to change. He feels it is the medical professions responsibility.
A healthy diet or exercise are not part of Melvin's lifestyle at the moment. Anderson (2003) has found that people do not encode or remember information that may disrupt their lifestyle. In fact at the moment changing his diet and exercising are so challenging to Melvin's existing lifestyle that he cannot follow the doctor's advice without understanding why it is so important to do so. Walker (1996) in 'psychology for the caring professions' explains how this is to do with an individuals schema. If the individual has a complex schema they are able to manages changes to their lifestyle, but if they do not they cannot (Linville, 1987). The search for factors that influence personal health choices is considered by Carter and Kulbok to be primarily driven by the health care professionals desire to influence the decisions (2002). This knowledge allows doctors to control the relationship yet still appear to be client centred.
Alice also does not feel she has the ability or desire to make herself better she feels that her experience of depression is the result of chance and the changing roles of others around her; she has therefore not taken on the sick role and is not currently seeing her doctor for medication or therapy. This is referred to by (Seligman 1975) as learned helplessness and can result in perceived uncontrollability. This explains situations where the individual feels that they have no power or control over their situation. The health care professional who is treating Alice would need to take this into account and help her to understand that it is within her control to feel better.
Another way of understanding these concepts is through the Common Sense Model. This model hypothesises that individuals create mental representations of their illness based upon how they interpret information available to them. The way individuals experience illness depends on how it affects their life. Psychologists Hagger and Orbell (2003) explain how individuals view their illness e.g. that it make their life worse or stops them from doing what they want to do. Beliefs about the ability to control or cure an illness can also be explained by the common sense model. For example whether people believe that following medical advice will relieve them of symptoms.
John does not understand that he has dementia so he does not believe that following medical advice will be of any benefit to him at all. Alice (45) is also unsure that following medical advice will relieve her of her symptoms of depression this in part explains why she has not taken the doctors advice of medication and therapy. Studies suggest that individuals who believed their illness to be uncontrollable and chronic let it affect them more than those who saw it to be less chronic and controllable (Hagger and Orbell 2003). Those who saw their condition to be uncontrollable avoided being treated. Julie has not been taking any medication for a few months now because she believes it the negative effects outweighed the positive ones.
Another explanation for the effects of illness on the individual can be explained by looking at the theories of stigma. Stigma can arise in many ways; a depressed person may appear sad or dull. Other factors, such as being seen visiting a psychiatric hospital or clinic may also mark someone as 'mental' or 'psychiatric' (Royal psychology association, 2005). Once someone is identified as different, it's hard for them to be accepted (Royal psychology association, 2005). They can't shake off the stigma and as a result they lose confidence in themselves. In time they come to believe that they are odd and don't fit in. Knowledge of these stigmas has influence Alice's (45) decision not to have therapy.
All the effects of illness on Alice (45) already described have made Alice feel more depressed and less motivated to overcome the experience of depression. Maslow (1968) developed a theory to explain why individuals are motivated to do things. He rationalised that individuals are motivated to achieve things that meet psychological and physiological needs and that once they have achieved these things they can meet needs concerned with developing their potential. Alice has no physiological needs such as food, warmth or shelter; neither does she have safety needs. She is loved by members of her family so does not have those needs. However, she is lacking in self esteem and has a poor self concept. At present the sense of hopelessness Alice feels at achieving at having a better self concept and increased self esteem has meant she is not willing to try. Creek (2002) believes that the Therapist needs to take these things into account when working with a client who experiences a condition such as depression. Carter and Kulbuck (2002) have found that whilst theorists misuse theories of motivation to explain why individuals do or do not seek health, there is evidence to suggest that the individual's locus of control and self concept can affect motivation to seek health.
It is evident that the concept of the sick role does not apply to all situations. For example when a person is chronically ill they cannot simply get better. In this situation how illness affects the individuals is better explained by the level of control or power they have over their condition. McNamara (2001) considers that "The terminally ill person's experience...will be influenced largely by their ability to participate in decisions (p245 McNamara in Purdy and Banks, 2001). In this case study Julie is participating in decisions about her condition. However despite Julie's involvement in her treatment and care she is still not in control of the debilitating effects of the condition. The experience of living with a chronic condition can further be explained in relation to inability to perform the practical matters of everyday life (Locker 2004).
Despite treatment Julie has lost her ability to participate in activities of daily living and needs to be cared for. Julie's self concept is also affected by her illness. Pain, nausea and fatigue can all alter self-concepts (McNamara, 2001) . Julie's body has been significantly changed by her illness, not only through surgery but by the effects of chemotherapy this has had a major impact upon her self concept. Sociology helps us to understand these effects on the individual by the development of social construction theories. Social construction theories offer explanations of what it means to be a person (McNamara, 2001).
Julie and her doctor have a relatively equal and client centred relationship. This has had a positive effect on her experience of illness. May et al (2004) have found that how doctors conceptualise chronic illness can affect how they respond to patients. Both sociologists and psychologists have explored doctor patient relationships in more detail and through these studies it has become apparent that there is not always an equal distribution of power in service delivery. The individual cannot demand attention, time or understanding from the doctor. In fact medical knowledge can be seen as a source of power in itself. Byrne and Long (1976) have found that some doctors practise seems to be based upon the idea that the doctor is the expert. At the other end of the continuum doctors base their consultations on a more patient centred approach which is focused more on listening and responding to individual needs. Stimson and Webb (2001) have found that both patients plan what to say to the doctor so that he takes notice.
Morgan (1997) believes that the individual is unlikely to disclose how they feel about the medical advice they have been given if they do not feel the doctor will listen or act upon it. The effect of this may be that individuals do not follow medical advice and without informing their doctor that they are not. If the GP is to find out what Melvin believes about his high blood pressure and whether or not he is going to take on advice then he will need to allow the consultation to be client centred. By doing this he will allow Melvin to disclose information to him rather than the relationship being only one way.
If an individual's experience of service delivery is not positive they may develop a belief that the health care professional cannot help them. The effect this may have on the individual is that they do not overcome being ill. Classical conditioning theory can describe individual's responses to of service delivery. Classical conditioning theory was first introduced by Ivan Pavlov to describe associative learning (Walker et Al, 2004). For example if you have had a bad experience in hospital you will learn to associate negative feelings with hospitals. This can lead to avoiding being diagnosed, ignoring the problem or acting inappropriately. (Walker et Al, 2004).
Freda does not want to go into a nursing home because she feels that it is like a hospital. Freda has developed a fear of hospitals because she has had a bad experience when she first went into hospital after she experienced her stroke. This fear has been learnt by associating hospitals with bad feelings; it is therefore an example of classical conditioning. If the health care professional did not understand Freda's fear then they would not be unable to understand why Freda was afraid of going into hospital. The effects of service delivery on the individual here can be explained by understanding that Freda has had negative experience of service delivery and therefore does not which to repeat it.
Finally it is important to consider how culture influences the effects of illness on the individual's within the case study. Sociology in particular looks at culture. Scrambler (2004) believes that how individuals interpret and experience the effects of illness can depend upon their culture. In the case study Rosa is of Italian descent and is a Roman catholic family life are very important to her and she would like her family to look after Freda following her stroke. If a care manager were to intervene and organise care without taking this cultural belief into account then the care set up may not be appreciated and may in fact be seen as an insult to the family by implying that they cannot cope. The effect of this service delivery could mean that the family will no longer trust a care manager to do what is right by them. In fact in this example family Melvin is arranging for Freda to go into residential care, Rosa does not mind this as it has been discussed and is being arranged by the family. However the care home itself needs consideration e.g. access to church on Sundays.
All the theory's and examples included in this essay explain how sociology and psychology can help the healthcare professional to understand the effects of illness and service delivery on the individual within the context of their family, society or culture. The scientific studies of both sociologists and psychologists provide the health care professional with evidence to support their understanding of how the individual is affected by illness and service delivery. They do this by looking at what aspects of the individuals life is affected for example their role and explain why this occurs by theories such as classical conditioning, social construction and common sense models of health and illness. Without consideration of these theories, interventions would be based purely upon the biological effects of illness on the individual. The influence of sociology and psychology have allowed the health care professional to work in a more client centred and holistic way by explaining the possible effects of illness on the individual. This is crucial if health care is to meet all the needs of the individual and not just the biological ones.