A simplified initial view of Anne Bradshaw's poem 'The Author to Her Book' is that she has a negative view on her poetry. Within the first few lines of verse, she uses negative words and phrases; "ill-formed", "feeble"(1), "snatched"(3) and "exposed"(4), all of which primarily produce pessimistic connotations. They could also be considered litotes; the word "feeble" especially. Bradshaw goes on to describe how editing her writing is a difficult process, "I cast thee by as one unfit for light". This statement could be considered a continuation of the negative language felt earlier. To me however, she shows herself to be a highly competent poet, who is prepared to scrutinise her own work in order to achieve the best possible result. Indeed one could argue that from the moment the poem begins, she personifies her written work, likening it to the birth of a child, "Thou ill formed off-spring from my brain". Offspring is usually a word to describe something that is positive and special, something to be celebrated. One could infer therefore that Bradshaw draws attention to the weaknesses of her work in order to highlight its main strengths. Her modesty allows the reader to engage with the text in a more natural and sympathetic fashion. I do not feel for example, that the poem would have been as effective had she initially applauded her work. Bradshaw continues to use negative imagery throughout the rest of the poem. A hyperbole in line 10 exemplifies this, "Thy visage was so irksome in my sight", drawing further sympathy from the reader.
One might also see a socially contextual allegory in this image of the poem as her 'child'. As a female writer in the 17 th Century, Bradshaw's literature may not have seemed as widely accepted as that of her male counterparts. The image of her 'giving birth' to this writing celebrates motherhood and outlines the importance of female contribution to literature at the time. Her choice of masculine rhyme is probably to make her poem sound manlier, and enable her work to be more accepted amongst both genders.
The poem is a 24-line verse, formed in regular iambic pentameter. The use of rhyming couplets adds a light tone, making poem easy to read. The 'fun' rhyme of the poem further supports the fact that Bradshaw is in-fact celebrative of her work. There are however, a few anomalies; in lines 19-22, Bradshaw does not use the expected rhyme scheme of J, J, K, K. Instead she alternates between J and K and uses half-rhyme. This would perhaps strengthen the content of these lines though, as the poet talks of "roam(ing)" and "find(ing)" - general feelings of disorientation. Here the rhyme scheme is itself 'disorientated'.
One sees interesting parallels with the work of Seamus Heaney in his poem 'Digging'. Both poets take themselves and the reader on a journey of self-identification, and begin to question their work or profession. Both relate to their families, and use figurative language to help describe their thoughts or inspirations. Heaney's thoughts are considered to be 'good turf'. It is also interesting to see how both poems begin with a fairly negative tone, but reach the conclusion that they are proud of their work as poets.