The aim of this essay is to examine how different sectors of the leisure industry contribute to the provision of leisure opportunities in the UK. It will do this by examining each sector in turn and then drawing conclusions.
The public sector plays an important role in providing leisure facilities in the UK. Both central and local government are involved. In central government, organisation of leisure responsibilities involves 4 major departments - The Departments of Environment, Education and Science, Employment, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Foods. There are also government agencies, quangos and non-departmental public bodies e.g. Arts Council of England, Sports Council, National Park Authorities. The government works with and through these to provide for recreation. They assist with planning, provision and management.
The local authority has a large input into leisure provision - in 1985/6 local government spent 1882 million under the revenue budget headings of recreation and leisure [Haywood, 2002.] The local authority provides some facilities for general public use e.g. swimming pools, libraries. Land extensive facilities (such as water recreation and parks) and very expensive buildings are also often provided by the local authority due to the cost of building and the fact that they require a lot of land. They are therefore not attractive investments for the private sector.
The public may not pay directly for the use of some facilities but they may pay indirectly through rates and tax. For other facilities they may be a charge e.g. for golf courses and theatres.This charge may be subsidised by the local authority. The local authority pays the salaries of those who work in its facilities and this makes up a large proportion of its leisure spending.
The local authority also provides funding indirectly e.g. through financial support. They provide grants and support to youth and community services and organisations.
The planning system has an important role in recreation. The council can assist with availability of land and resources for leisure by giving / withholding planning consent. This will have an effect on leisure provision by other sectors. Planning guidance (specifically PPG 17 which applies to support and recreation) guides the council as to what kind of leisure facilities should be encouraged and where they can be built.
Provision of leisure opportunities by the public sector is led by central government policy. Policy filters down to the local level. The local authority provides opportunities for leisure and recreation through "planning, facilities, services, budget and support" [Torkildsen, 2005] However, the role of the state in the provision of leisure is "complex and fragmented." [Haywood, 2002]
This comprises both volunteering as a leisure activity in itself, and not-for-profit providers e.g. societies and clubs. Community involvement and volunteering are an important part of making this sector what it is.
Voluntary organizations have a long history. In the early 18th century they existed as political coffee clubs. Voluntary sector organisations became increasingly important as rural society became industrialized; they provided "the medium for development and pursuit of common interests, which might previously have been met by the extended family or local community." [Haywood, 2002]
The voluntary sector is made up of a huge range and diversity of organisations, some of which have primary goals other than relating to leisure. Some of the types of organisations are shown in the table below:
The groups range from those which represent certain sectors of the population e.g. women's groups, disabled groups, to those set up for the pursuit of certain hobbies/ interests. These organisations provide the opportunity for likeminded people to get together, and in some cases these groups provide leisure opportunities to disadvantaged people whose needs may not be met by the other leisure sectors.
Volunteering is a leisure opportunity in itself. In the 2001 ONS omnibus survey, 32% of adults said they had volunteered at least once in the last 12 months. Voluntary activity increases with age - 64% of adults over 70 years had volunteered in the last four weeks [Torkildsen, 2005]. Volunteering has a range of benefits, such as the opportunities to contribute to the community, for shared learning, social empowerment and self-fulfilment. It gives people the chance to participate and be involved in all levels of an organisation and its management. It also has an economic value; the Home Office values the contribution of formal volunteering at 36 billion a year. [Torkildsen, 2005.]
The voluntary sector has an important role in the pattern of leisure provision. It provides opportunities that none of the other sectors can, and can make a very positive difference to people's lives and their communities.
The primary objective of this sector is to make financial profit. Access to the leisure opportunities it provides will usually depend on the ability of people to pay. There has been a huge growth in disposable income and household consumer expenditure on leisure in the last fifty years. People also have more leisure time, and people's residual income is taken up in a large proportion by commercial products and services. The table below shows household expenditure in the UK and demonstrates that leisure is an attractive and potentially lucrative market.
There are a range of providers in this sector, from small local businesses to huge multinational companies. Multinationals have a significant role in the UK leisure industry. They often have very diverse holdings, in different types of activities. This is to help insure against the risks of trends and fashions, which may mean leisure activities gain and lose popularity rapidly. An example of a multinational is Granada, which holds interests in television, motorway services, hotels, cinemas and health clubs. Ownership in the leisure industry has also become increasingly concentrated into the hands of a few large conglomerates [Haywood, 2002]. An example of this is Rupert Murdoch's empire; his company owns a huge range of newspapers, satellite channels and publishing companies.
The commercial sector provides the public with a range of leisure opportunities, both in the home such as TV, papers, DVDs, and outside such as clubs, restaurants, cinemas, betting, gambling, commercial sports and health and fitness centres. The tourist and holiday industry is also an expanding market. Commercial leisure is a massive industry, but it is limited to what can be provided through the market and may not always cater for poor, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups' needs.
People's leisure and recreation is made possible by a range of providers -- public, commercial and voluntary. They each have different roles to play. There is some overlap between each sector and the type of facilities they provide. However there are differences in their philosophy, aims and approach. A range of services and programs are needed to meet the diverse needs and the aims of the population and coordination between the difference sectors is important to achieve this.