An experiment was carried out to investigate the effect of new items in a list on the frequency of false memories. Proportions of new, critical lure words incorrectly identified as old words were obtained from participants in two groups: with new words in a test list and without new words in the test list. It was found that the presence of new words does increase the likelihood of a false memory occurring involving the critical lure. These results are considered in terms of the brain's familiarity threshold, and its ability to correctly distinguish closely semantically related words as either new or old.
It is now widely accepted that the brain has the ability to create false memories. Craik and Tulving showed that items are more likely to be remembered if they are elaborated on and connecting to similar concepts already held in the brain (1975). Is it possible, then, that the brain can also falsely remember an item that is closely related to other items presented to it?
Roediger and McDermott presented participants with a recognition test, where they were read study lists in which all the words are related to a semantically associated critical lure word. They were then presented with a test list which comprised of words from the old list, the critical which words and new unrelated words. They were asked to identify from the test list which words they believed were old and which were new. Roediger and McDermott found that critical lures words were incorrectly recognised as old more frequently than the new, unrelated words (1995).
In this experiment, we aim to investigate the effect that the presence of the new, unrelated words has on the proportion of times that a critical lure is incorrectly identified as old. Monsell discusses the idea of an activating level applying to memory retrieval, whereby an item is classified as old if enough associations can be recalled to raise its activation level, and when it reaches a threshold, it is classified as old (1979). In the case of our experiment, the critical lures, by their nature, come very close to the familiarity threshold level of the old words that are actually on the lists. We could therefore expect the presence of the new, unrelated words to lower this threshold, making it easier and more likely that a critical lure will be incorrectly identified as an old word.
For this experiment, six participants were chosen at opportunity. These six were tested individually in two groups, groups 'With' and 'Without', with three participants in each group. The participants were obtained from the residential hall, and no incentive was offered to take part in the experiment.
At the beginning of the experiment, we wanted to find out what the effect of unfamiliar words is on false memory. When presented with these new, unrelated words, would a participant be more likely to incorrectly identify a critical lure word as on old word? We predicted that the presence of the new words would lower the familiarity threshold, and hence lead to critical lures being incorrectly identified as an old word more frequently than participants that were not faced with the new words. The results shown by Table 1 would support this prediction, as we can see the proportion of times a critical lure is identified as old is higher in the group of participants were faced with new words. The average proportion of critical lures identified as old was 0.59 in the group with the new words, and 0.52 in the group without. In addition, we can also see from Table 1 that there was very little difference in the proportion of old words correctly identified as old (0.55 for group with new words, 0.54 for group without). Also, perhaps surprisingly, one quarter of the new words were also, incorrectly, identified as old.
From the results, we can see that participants incorrectly identified a critical lure when the new, unrelated words were included in their test list. Our theory was that the presence of these new unrelated words would lower the familiarity threshold below the level for discriminating the critical lures as new words, as they have close association with the old words. Clearly, the presence of new words does indeed lower this threshold: this may be because the brain is more focussed with the fact that the unrelated words have very little semantic association with other words to be able to properly distinguish more closely related words as new.
Another thing we notice from the results is that they also show the same outcome that was observed by Roediger and McDermott: participants identified more critical lures as old words than they did the new, unrelated words (1995) (in fact, we see that a participant was more than twice as likely to identify a critical lure as old than a new word).
One of the problems with this experiment is that it does not fully address the nature of false memory: for example, a participant answering the test list most probably does not specifically recall hearing any of the words (unless some unusual event occurred at the word, like the reader coughing) but rather has a general impression in their head of the nature of words heard, and so when a semantically associated word appears in the list a participant is more likely to regard it as old than a new word, as they will not remember the new word as 'fitting in' with the others read in the study list.
An interesting advance to the research would be to see if the creation of false memories can be induced in other types of memory, perhaps in a series of pictures presented or situations experienced. However, it is clear that the human memory is certainly not infallible, and can, quite easily, be tricked into making mistakes.