This essay aims to describe the main methods of local government revenue collection in the UK, their pros and cons and some similarities and differences. It then goes on to discuss their implications for local democracy.
Some argue that if only a small proportion of local spending is funded locally, this takes it difficult for a voter in a local election to evaluate the value for money which the council is providing and so make a rational choice at the ballot box. (Bow Commission, 2002) If voters feel that their vote will not make a difference, they may not vote and this would damage local democracy. Real accountability at the local level will be ensured by making a clear link between local taxes paid and services received. The current system in the UK is highly centralised, so giving local authorities more powers to raise their own finances would give them greater freedom from central government control and allow them to develop local approaches to issues. Voters would have a better idea of the cost of the services which they were receiving, allowing them to make rational decisions at the ballot box. Therefore, raising more revenue by local property taxes, user charging, a local sales tax or local income-tax would have advantages.
Local property taxes promote local autonomy and accountability. They provide a clear base and give local authorities their own source of revenue, providing them with a degree of financial independence from central government. (Harvey and Jowsey, 2006) Also, as they are raised locally and the rate is determined annually it makes local authorities responsible to local people. However, such accountability is limited in that only residential properties are directly linked to the electoral process.
User charging may give voters an idea of the cost of the services they receive. However, they can only be used for some services, (those people can choose whether or not they wish to use,) and only those which benefit consumers personally and directly.
Local sales tax would encourage visitors to pay for services. However, it would bolster tax income in urban areas at the expense of rural areas and could be undermined by people shopping in areas where tax rates were low.
Local income-tax, as recommended by the Layfield committee report, would help to make local authorities self financing. The local income-tax would impact directly on residents in each local authority area and so link local payment of tax to receipt of services. If the tax is progressive, this would also ensure that the populations of less affluent local authority areas would not have to spend a higher proportion of their aggregate income on local tax than the populations of more affluent areas. However, administrative and collection costs may be high, and this approach may clash with a government's aim of reducing the basic rate of tax.
An argument against local government having more financial control is that central government can redistribute wealth to ensure it is distributed fairly. In the US Federal system, funding is very local, and arguably this results in poverty in some of the poorest states. In some areas, too much local control may emphasise local divisions e.g. the conflicts between the French and Dutch speaking areas in Belgium.
There are many different methods of local government revenue collection. Currently the main methods are through taxation, borrowing, UBR and grants. A good financial system will be one where taxation is 'fair, practicable and cheap to collect, ensures the authority's accountability to local voters and harmonises local autonomy with the central government's macro economic policy requirements.'(Harvey and Jowsey, 2006, p428.) Each method of taxation has advantages and disadvantages. However arguably the system which best protects local democracy is one where there is real accountability at a local level, where local authorities raise as much of their finance themselves as is possible. In my opinion local property taxes, local income-tax and user charging would be the methods which best support these aims.