'Our Land Was A Forest' is an autobiography of the life of Kayano Shigeru, in which the author gives an account of his life as an Ainu and two generations above him, giving an accurate depiction of Ainu life, which spans 150 years. Although the book is a personal portrayal of Kayano's life it is also, due to the context, a historical account of the indigenous people of northern Japan and demonstrates how, as a nation, they were stripped of their land, culture and identity by the Japanese. Kayano gives the reader an insight into his life as an Ainu who lives a life of submission to the Japanese's 'government policies of relocation and assimilation aimed at the eventual extinction of the Ainu' (Siddle: 1997: 17). He then undergoes a 'cultural rebirth' where he realizes the importance of fighting for the preservation of his fading Ainu identity. Having been empowered by his culture Kayano goes on to become a leading activist against the extinction of the Ainu heritage, and his election as the first Ainu into the Japanese Diet demonstrates the strength of his determination. The book illustrates that 'the dying people (horobiyuku minzoku)' (Honda: 1993: xxiv) are still very much culturally alive and resisting Japanese attempts to make them 'totally assimilated or biologically extinct." (Siddle: 1993: 17) I shall now give a critical analysis of the book, highlighting the positive and negative aspects that Kayano presents.
The first and foremost element of the book that strikes the reader is the writing style: the book is autobiographical and written by an Ainu which immediately creates a sense of cultural accuracy, and we feel we are getting insight into information that could not be achieved if written by an 'outsider'. Kayano, as an 'insider', 'offers a living testimonial to the history, ethos, customs, beliefs, hopes, and aspirations' (Hane: 1980, 1994: xi) of his people 'unlike many accounts by outsiders' (Hane: 1980, 1994: xi), and therefore we are more inclined, to believe the information he presents. In addition to this, by using a first person narrative Kayano creates a more intimate atmosphere, and a stronger author-reader connection is established. Due to this connection Kayano has created, he 'draws us into the world of the Ainu' (Hane: 1980, 1994: xi), increasing the empathy that his readers feel and successfully achieves one of his primary aims - to create sympathy and support for the Ainu's cause.
The second element that Kayano successfully employs to his advantage is his use of language. The book begins with Kayano describing the natural beauty of the Nibutani Valley. The book is opened with images of nature, which Kayano repeats extensively throughout the book- '...the mountains off in the distance from Nibutani, the running waters, the trees, the flowers." (Kayano: (1980, 1994: 5), '...bountiful rivers with plenty of salmon swimming upstream; there are also many deer in the surrounding mountains,' (Kayano: 1980, 1994: 38) to highlight only two. Insight is giving to the reader by illustrating the harmony in which the Ainu live with nature. The constant repetition of this imagery imbeds in the mind of the reader, an image of a naturally harmonious, gentle and spiritual people living a life of simplicity. This, in comparison with aggressive images presented of the Japanese 'corporate giants' (Kayano: 1980, 1994: 9) who 'robbed' and 'stripped' (Kayano: 1980, 1994: 99) the Ainu of their land and identity, encourages the reader to think of the Ainu as the innocent party and therefore furthers the sympathy felt for them.
Although the book can be seen as successfully achieving many of Kayano's desired aims, interestingly, the above techniques could also be seen to be detrimental in attaining his ambitions.
As I previously mentioned, the fact that Kayano is Ainu works in his favour, but only to a certain degree. This is also a negative element of the book, as due to Kayano's social and political context the reader is not given a balanced perspective, in this 'unabashedly partisan portrayal of the Ainu people's history." (Howell: 1993: xii) He has total control of constructing and presenting images and portrayals of people. For example, throughout the entire book he portrays the Ainu 'as passive victims of Japanese aggression' (Howell: 1993: xii) and fails to mention acts of Ainu-led violence like Shakushain's War of 1669, which would not have supported the image he wanted to depict. The repetition of the natural imagery could also be another example of this. Kayano uses it to create an idyllic and harmonious image of Hokkaido and also the Ainu people. However, the extensive repetition could be considered romanticizing and over-exaggerating. Once again, no Japanese viewpoint is put across, therefore a balanced perspective is unattainable. The chance that the author may be over-exaggerating and choosing to exclude certain information because of his desire to favour his own cause, is something that the reader needs to bear in mind.
Although there are negative aspects to 'Our Land Was Forest' it is important to remember Kayano's key concern- making the reader feel empathetic for Ainu people, because if this were not achieved, the chance of gaining more support would be unlikely. The descriptive over-exaggerations, although they may be slightly misleading, are necessary in achieving his aim, because writing a 'dispassionate study of the Ainu' (Honda: 1993: xiii) would dilute the strength, influence and power that the book holds. The book 'Our Land Was A Forest' sold extremely successfully in Japanese, so much so that it was translated into English and French to enable Kayano's message to reach a wider audience. Since the publication of the book, Kayano Shigeru has become 'a leading figure in the Ainu campaign for human rights, cultural preservation and recognition as indigenous people' (Siddle: 1994) and has raised much awareness and support for the Ainu. Clearly, in writing 'Our Land Was A Forest' Kayano has successfully achieved the effect, reaction and response he desired.