Anne Allison's ethnography reflects the 'rules and expectations' that dominate many areas of society and the uniqueness and distinctiveness of the lives of the Japanese. Aspects of society are presented as they are 'classified and ordered by the Japanese people,' giving the reader insight into their individual culture. The elements of society that the ethnography has particular inclination towards reflecting are; family life, work and leisure and gender and I shall focus on these three topics and explain what and how they reflect Japanese culture and society.
Husbands appear to play an invisible role in family life in Japan. 'The husband manages outside matters (while the wife manages inside matters') which consists simply of ensuring a good income for his family. This means, due to the rigorous demands of the Japanese world of work, husbands spend very little time at home, which diminishes the connection between the man as a husband to his wife and as a father to his children. Allison reflects this aspect of society in the ethnography in many ways. She explains husband's and father's regular visits to the hostess clubs and therefore their lack of presence in the home as being because men feel incapable of relaxing and being themselves at home. To us, as Westerners this concept seems incomprehensible because to us 'the home' is normally seen as the one place we can relax and be our true selves, showing our true 'honne'. However in Japanese society Allison explains that 'the idea of relaxation doesn't jibe with the associations framed by family and home'. This explains the lack of presence of the father and husband in the home and because of this he spends very little time there-Allison describes one client in the hostess club as saying 'he joins his family for dinner perhaps once every 6 months' which demonstrates this point. As a result of the little time spent with his family there is sometimes very little emotional connection between the family and the husband or the father. Allison demonstrates this when she explains that 'in the hostess club there is infrequent mention of home (specifically wife and children)' and that the members of his family simply except the idea that 'the removed husband is a fact of life; for some it's even preferred.'
In Japanese society no boundary between work and leisure is clearly established. There is no distinct difference between work and leisure as any free time that is available is filled with socializing with work colleagues. Careers 'tend to take over much more of their employees' lives than companies elsewhere are wont to do'. This is reflected in the ethnography when Allison explains that 'work provides the guise, rationale and impulse for the hostess club' as men come to the club to socialize with colleagues to strengthen work relationships 'and through such relationships, business is sustained in Japan." This displays the hazy boundary between work and leisure as the men are out socializing but because of work. It also highlights the dependency between the two elements- Work relies on leisure (like the hostess club) to strengthen working relationships and leisure relies on that need to strengthen work ties to be a successful leisure facility. Work and leisure are dependant on one another. The amount of time that employees devote to their jobs also reflects part of the Japanese work ethic- 'hard work= Japanese work style= success'.
According to the indigenous 'ie' family system, which was based on Confucian principles 'men were superior to women'. Although this system is now not acceptable anymore the traditional view of the hierarchy of the sexes has survived and still manages to pervade many parts of Japanese society. In the ethnography this primarily shown most obviously through the treatment of the hostesses by the male clients- Allison describes how one male client 'reached out and patted her breast without even a murmur or even a glance' and how when lecherous gestures were made at them 'a hostess must be willing to put up with them'. Clearly this comes, as a part of the job- men would not get away with 'patting her breast' were she not a hostess. But the hostessing employment world is dominated by women not men which is key as it demonstrates that generally in Japanese society it is believed that there is 'one gender of servicer- female- and one gender of serviced- male." Allison continues to demonstrate this concept in relation to home life and marriage. The word for housewife, 'oku' literally means 'inside' which reflects their job of managing all things within the house which includes the 'management of all matters of home, family and domestic maintenance. By contrast, the single constant expectation of a father/husband is to be the financial supporter of the house." Here Allison illustrates again the idea of women servicing and doing everything for men- 'she is the slave, he the master'.
I have highlighted the most prominent elements of Japanese society that Allison has presented in 'Nightwork: Sexuality, Pleasure and Corporate Masculinity in a Tokyo Hostess Club.' However, at the end of the ethnography, Allison offers a slightly different view to the presentation of women and men. She explains that all this time the home has been 'managed by the woman' and that because of this and the little time the husband spends at home as he always 'in the company of other men', men can expect 'on his retirement, to be faced with the possibility of a dyadic, long term heterosexual relationship' because he is simply now not needed or wanted. This presents men as weak and lonely because 'take away the female, the service and the money to pay for both, however and the male is stripped of his maleness." This shows that the service and female company and ego-stroking that women provide, makes men what they are, and that without it they become nothing- at work and home. This implies that underneath the surface of the gender hierarchy, it is really women who have the control over all realms of society.