There are many ways in which a society can attempt to control the social and moral behaviour of its citizens. The exact technique of this varies from society to society but most, employ the same concepts as each other but practice them in different ways depending on the development of the society and on its culture. The concepts which I believe help to maintain moral and social order are; The state, the enforcers, the law and sanctions, norms and values and the supernatural. I shall, firstly, talk about each element individually, discussing it in a relatable Western context and then, secondly, show how the idea can be applied to another society- Bunyoro, an area of western Uganda.
In the West we have a centralized political system, which is arranged in a hierarchial, pyramidal form. The State or the Governement is at the top which within itself also has a head- In Britain for example, the head of state would be the Monarch or the Prime Minister. A great degree of importance is attached to the leader of the state because of their 'ascribed' or 'achieved' status and also to the state because essentially they hold the fate of the society in their hands and if you go against the will of the state, you will be punished.
We see this idea mirrored in the society of Bunyoro. They have a head of state, the King, who they call the 'Mukama'. The Mukama holds a great deal of importance and power as the head of state which is shown through; his ancestral roots and the affect he has on Bunyoro society. The Mukama is a 'hereditary ruler', a direct descendant in a long line of Kings. This in itself communicates to the people of Bunyoro the power he possesses because of his heritage but also the ritual procedure he has endured to become king- he has to undergo a ritual ceremony which stresses his 'attainment to supreme political power' to the people of Bunyoro. In addition to these two things, he is also at the top of the hierarchal state system, therefore he holds the most power. As he and his previous ruling ancestors have so much power and 'they are not thought of as fathers of their people, but rulers of their people', this encourages the society to abide my his laws and orders because the idea of him as the ruler is completely installed within them. As well as the idea of a head of state, the hierarchal, pyramidal form of state appears also in Bunyoro society to maintain control. As the state is arranged in 'layers' of power, somebody is always dominating somebody. There is always someone with more power than someone else. The words that are used for the political system are 'bukama' or 'bulemi', which we translate as "kingship" and "governement". However this translation is not enough to explain the true meaning of these words to the people of Bunyoro. They both have strong inclinations of ownership. 'Bulemi' is derived from the word 'kulema' which means literally 'to rule'. The format and even the names used for the State system advocates the idea of having power over one another and primarily over the people of Bunyoro.
One of the benefits of a tax paying society is that it is given protection in times of dispute. In the West we have institutions to ensure the safety of the citizens, to enforce the law of the governement and to punish people for incorrect social and moral conduct. For example Britain has a military and an internal police force. Without these 'enforcers' of the will of the governement, society would be in complete disarray.
This idea also appears in Bunyoro society. The responsiblity for ensuring that Bunyoro society runs correctly is divided up in a hierarchal system. 'There are four grades of official chiefs; the county chiefs, the sub-county chiefs, the "parish" chiefs, and the village headmen." There are four of the county chiefs who are in charge of several hundred square miles of land. The four sub-county chiefs beneath them are responsible for the dividing up of the county. Each sub-county area has two or three parishes which are headed by the parish chiefs. At the bottom of the pyramidal system are the village headmen who are responsible for two or three square miles each containing about one hundred people. Having all areas of Bunyoro covered by the chiefs encourages the people to behave socially and morally correctly because they know they are being surveyed down to the last square mile, and if they step out of line, they will be caught. Also because the chiefs engaged in a hierarchal system this ensures that they follow the will of the governement and do their job correctly because if they do not, a senior chief will notice.
Another method of social control that can be employed is the use of sanctions. Radcliffe-Brown described sanctions as 'a reaction on the part of society or of a considerable number of its members to a mode of behaviour which is thereby approved (positive sanctions) or disapproved (negative sanctions)." Society may punish a member with a negative sanction or reward it with a positive one. For example positive sanctions may include: awards, fame, decoration, and negative sanctions: punishment, bad reputation. The threat of negative sanctions discourage the members of a society to behave socially and morally incorrect and positive sanctions encourage them to behave socially and morally correct.
Bunyoro society also uses sanctions as a way of encouraging proper conduct amongst its members of society. When someone breaks a rule or law in Bunyoro they can be sent to three places: the neighbourhood court (small crimes and disputes), the chief's court (crimes that are unsettleable in neighbourhood court) or they can be left in the hands of the Uganda protectorate police force (more major crimes such as homicide or rape). The sanctions issued by each court increase in their severity as the power of the court increases. So society knows that if you commit a serious crime, you can be handed to the chief court or the Uganda police and the sanction will be extremely harsh. This creates a sense of fear and discourages members from committing crimes and therefore acting out of the social and moral order. For example, in Uganda the Nyoro alarm call in neighbourhoods 'is a loud ululation...and all able-bodied men should respond to it. Failure to do so is an offence punishable in chief's courts." This shows if a member acts immorally they will be punished severely.
Positive sanctions can be issued by the Mukama for exceedingly impressive behaviour. Often these can be things such as crowns, or a promotion or sometimes 'he gave an elaborate beaded headdresses, with fringes or "beards" of colobus monkey skins' for special distinction. This displays the idea that positive sanctions help to control the behaviour of the people as with rewards and distinctions from the king in mind, they behave morally and socially correct hoping to receive a decoration.
Controlling and maintaining a society's moral and social order can also be conducted through the idea of norms. These are standards of behaviour that are learnt throughout a persons socialisation. For example when a parent is raising a child, it will teach it the correct way to behave, for instance, the idea of what is right and what is wrong, according to the norm of society.
We see this element of control appear widely in Bunyoro society. The hierarchal system that the Bunyoro state is formed in, invades social life as well as political life. 'The idea of superordination and subordination' and 'the idea of "ruling" is not restricted to the political sphere'. We see this extremely clearly in Nyoro families. The father is seen as the 'master' and 'ruler' of the household. Nyoro people say a father 'rules the household just as the Mukama rules the whole country.' This hierarchal system is a total norm for the people of Bunyoro because they have been surrounded by it from birth. Therefore they have always been used to the idea that they, as well being a superordinate and most importantly a subordinate as there is always someone else with more power above them. Being completely socialised to this idea makes people less likely to react against the system as it is totally installed within them.
In Nyoro culture it is a norm for families to be extremely close. Particular stress has always been put on the idea that no matter how distant the relative is, a good relationship must be maintained with them. This norm alone encourages good social and moral behaviour toward one another but also in Bunyoro the different classification of family members, furthers it. For instance, what we call cousins, uncles and aunts in Britain are classed as 'brothers' and 'sisters' and 'mothers' and 'fathers' respectively in Bunyoro no matter how distant the relative. This unites wider social fields under the term of 'family' therefore meaning that a good relationship must me maintained with a much larger group of people, which then increases the need for members of Bunyoro society to behave socially and morally correctly.
Another norm that helps to maintain moral and social order is the tradition of giving food and drink to your neighbours 'as a gesture of friendship and regard." This has always been done in Bunyoro society to maintain good a relationship between neighbours and to not offer food or to refuse food would be viewed as breaking the social norm and therefore being extremely rude. The people have this idea installed within them through socialisation and so it is rare that a member of Bunyoro refuses to take part in this good pattern of social behaviour.
The final method of how a society maintains a degree of social and moral order that I am going to discuss is the supernatural. This includes many different elements: witchcraft, sorcery, religion, shamanism, ancestral ghosts. Not only the fear of angering the supernatural but also the fear of being accused of being directly involved with the supernatural encourages good moral and social behaviour amongst the members of a society. For example Christians should not commit murder as the Bible states that 'thou shalt not kill'. From a Christian point of view, committing this sin will anger God and he will punish you. Christians fear what God will do if they disobey him so they tend to act in accordance.
The influence of the idea of the supernatural over peoples moral and social behaviour can be seen in Bunyoro society. Firstly it can be seen through the idea of sorcery. Nyoro people want to behave morally and socially correctly so that they do not anger or annoy a sorcerer as they are known to avenge anyone who upsets them and also so they do not get accused of being a sorcerer. This is because if you are accused of sorcery, your victim, or your victims family (if your action proved fatal) will seek revenge on the supposed sorcerer with the help of a diviner who may 'provide him with the recipe for medicine to kill the sorcerer'.
Secondly it can be seen through the idea of ancestral ghosts. In Bunyoro it is believed that 'ghostly vengeance may be a sanction for good interpersonal relations'. Nyoro believe that if you wrong another member of society, an ancestral ghost of that living person will cause you misfortune. Not only this but ancestral ghosts are also thought to punish for their own misfortune from when they were still alive. For example there was a case in Bunyoro when a father's (Yozefu) daughter fell ill. Shortly afterwards his brother's (Yowana) son became ill as well. Diviners were sure that it was due to 'Yowana's ill treatment of his father, who had died some months previously'. The diviners believed that because Yowana treated his father badly, his ghost was punishing him for it. The idea of angering and ancestral ghost causes fear amongst Nyoro people therefore encouraging them to behave properly and helping to maintain a degree of social and moral order.
In conclusion, I have discussed all the elements I fore-mentioned in my introduction and they are all employed by society as a means of maintaining social and moral order amongst its members. Obviously the emphasis on the most important elements varies from society to society but in Bunyoro I believe the most influential factor on maintaining social and moral order is undoubtedly, the state. This is because all the other influential factors stem from the state- The state employs the enforcers and creates the laws and sanctions for them to implement and for the people to follow. The state controls the people's socialisation process into the accepted norms and values through agents like education, religion, and essentially parents as they controlled their socialisation when they were young as well. The supernatural is not controlled directly by the state as they do not have power over the spirit world but the state can control the hype about the supernatural. Incresing the hype increases the fear and therefore increases the good behaviour and decreases the bad. So as the state controls the influential elements in so many ways, without it society would not maintain nearly as much social and moral order.