A fundamental aspect of health and social care is that all the different professions can work together in order to provide the best service to the patient or client. Communication between professionals is important, but it is perhaps even more vital to have good communication between professionals and their patients. Good communication skills increase patient satisfaction and result in the patient being more likely to adhere to advice given by the professional. This report investigates the skills needed to 'respond to others' effectively, and also demonstrates a multi-professional group working and communicating together.
There is a great need to be able to 'respond to others' in health and social care. Responding to others is basically all about communication; we talk to others and then listen to their responses. According to Stanton (2004), the objectives of communication are that our messages are received, understood, accepted and then any required action is taken. Problems within these stages will determine how successful the communication is. Understanding is very important; especially in a health and social care setting. It is vital for health professionals to understand each other, and also for them to be able to provide understanding for their patients or clients.
The term 'responding to others' could be used in many situations and so the 'others' could refer to numerous groups of people. In a family context, 'others' would refer to people outside of the family. As a health and social care professional, who the 'others' are will vary depending on the situation. It is a fundamental part of the profession to be able to communicate in a variety of contexts. The most likely context is that the 'others' are fellow colleagues belonging to the healthcare profession. In a hospital setting there would be a multi-professional team of doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, social workers and other professionals. Each field will have their own style of working and use different terminology. However they all need to respond to each other in order to work productively. Alternatively, the 'others' may be patients, clients or their families. Professionals must communicate successfully with these people and avoid using specialised jargon which would not necessarily be understood.
Successful communication requires various skills and values to be adopted. It is important that there are common ideas about communication because this is what allows us to communicate effectively across different cultures. In many settings, including that of health and social care, there is great diversity and this is a potential communication problem. Different cultures may have very different ideas about certain aspects of communication; for example, in some countries kissing someone on both cheeks is seen as an acceptable greeting, but in other countries this may be viewed as very unsuitable behaviour. Communication differences will always exist both between and within cultures and sub-cultures; however there are several aspects of communication that seem universal.
Larson (2000) identifies listening as one of the most important skills of successful communication. Active listening is seen to be the most effective; this is when the listener confirms understanding of the speaker, perhaps by nodding of the head or verbal encouragement. Larson (2000) states that, "active listening skills promote warmth and honest communication". Honest communication is certainly vital to healthcare professionals and they most likely use this method of active listening.
Another important skill of communication is that of being able to use non-verbal communication effectively. Argyle (1994) and Stanton (2004) have both completed considerable work on the skill of non-verbal communication. Non-verbal communication is anything other than speech that a person uses to convey a message. It includes such things as facial expression, hand gestures, tone of voice and body orientation. The two categories of non-verbal communication are metacommunication and paralanguage. Metacommunication means anything we interpret from the speaker over and above the actual words, for example facial expressions. It is very hard for a person to disguise emotions on the face. Eye contact is also an important tool for interpretation of meaning. Paralanguage is when we interpret from the voice; the paralanguage may actually convey the opposite of the words spoken. When this occurs, the listener usually picks up on the meaning of paralanguage rather than the meaning of the spoken words. Paralanguage is the idea behind the well-known phrase, 'it's not what he said, but the way he said it'. It is important to be able to use non-verbal communication effectively and also to interpret it when it is displayed by others.
Our group was formed by a random selection process to create a multi-professional group, this ensured that we would all have different experiences and skills to use and discuss with each other. The group consisted of five members originally and then two new members joined in weeks two and four. There were five women and one man in the group, and all members were mature students apart from myself.
One of the first activities performed by the group was to set some basic ground rules. This was to ensure that everybody would know what to expect from the group and hopefully allow the group to function effectively. The main rules were concerning communication. It was decided that if someone was going to be absent then they needed to make another group member aware of this as soon as possible, and also find out what progress the group had made in their absence. Everybody exchanged email addresses and phone numbers but it was decided that our main form of communication would be WebCT. Using WebCT would allow one person to communicate with the whole group at the same time, it also allowed information to be exchanged and accessed easily. Further rules included confidentiality, honesty, and that there would be an even work distribution within the group.
The idea of 'roles' was discussed early on; but it was decided that it was not appropriate to assign each person with a specific role. The nature of the roles we could have taken on would have probably caused an unequal workload within the group. The role of a researcher would have been considerably more work than the role of a time-keeper or note-taker. Considering the maturity of the group, it was felt a more democratic approach would be less formal and more productive.
Before thinking about the interview questions, we needed to decide what skills and values we were looking for in a new team member. This would allow questions to be produced that would elicit the required information. Numerous qualities were felt to be essential in a new team member, these included good communication skills, flexibility, being a team player and being non judgemental and trustworthy. Questions would also be included to find out about previous work history and experience.
After discussion, the group decided on some key points that make a good question. The question should be direct, unambiguous, use straightforward vocabulary, and be free from bias. In designing our questions, many of our decisions were influenced by the work of Stanton (2004). It was decided that open-ended questions would provide the most valuable responses and also display the interviewee's beliefs and attitudes. Open-ended questions also demonstrate a person's communication skills; such as organisation of thoughts and ability to express themselves clearly. However, this style of question can disadvantage the interviewer if the information obtained is too vague. Probes can be used to avoid this; probes help guide the interviewee and elicit more detail from them. Open-ended questions may also disadvantage very anxious interviewees. Keats (2000) described some of the likely behaviours of anxious interviewees; these included giving confused answers, talking too much and becoming flustered. In contrast, an interviewee's anxieties may also appear as hostility towards the interviewer. Each member of the group researched and designed questions with each of the specific values or skills in mind. The question the group thought would generate the most useful response was then picked for each value/skill; this can be seen when looking at the chosen questions (appendix 1). Several of the final questions were adapted from the work of Larson (2000) and research on interviews by the University of Indiana.
The questions needed to be organised into a sequence that would allow an interview to flow effectively. The chosen structure was based on the idea of 'tunnel sequencing' (Stanton 2004). This is a series of similar questions and should prevent the need for the interviewer to use probes. A closing question about personal time was used because the group felt this would be a good opportunity for an interviewee to reveal their personality.
It was a mutual opinion of the group that it would be important to make the interviewee feel comfortable in the interview situation. Important aspects of this included the interviewer introducing themselves and also explaining the purpose of the interview. The environment of the interview was also considered; a triangle setting emerged as the most practical and least threatening way of having two interviewers with one interviewee. If a note-taker or observer was present then they would sit back from the interview to prevent distracting the interviewee. Comfortable chairs around a low table would be used to keep the setting reasonably informal. There would also be water available for the interviewee to help themselves. Larson (2000) identifies many ways to make an interviewee feel at ease, one of the most important is to ensure that all people are seated at the same level; otherwise the interviewee may be intimidated unintentionally. All three persons sitting around one table should make the environment more comfortable; a more traditional setting involving a 'panel' of interviewers is likely to make the interviewee very nervous and uncomfortable.
The group did not work together particularly successfully. Stanton (2004) identifies many of the problems that can occur within groups. The group had difficulty in making any significant progress; there was often a lot of discussion but few decisions made. The late addition of new members also affected the dynamics of the group. The ground rules appeared to have little effect on group behaviour, unexplained absences started to occur and at least two members of the group never made the effort to communicate using WebCT. Roles developed in people quite quickly and some of the roles displayed 'non-functional behaviour' (Stanton 2004). Blocking is behaviour that interferes with group progress; citing unrelated personal stories and rejecting other's ideas are both examples of blocking. Other group members responded to this blocking behaviour by withdrawing from most group discussions and developing a rather passive role within the group.
One of the only similarities within the group was everybody's motivation to work. The problem seemed to occur because it could never be decided exactly what work people needed to do. Differences occurred with people's willingness to consider other people's ideas and with everybody's personal work methods. Some members of the group preferred to have their report as a work in progress, whereas others were leaving it until the end. This caused problems with the sharing of ideas and resources. There were also quite obvious gender and age differences within the group and these differences did seem to influence who was listened to and their ideas considered. Despite the issues, there were no major arguments within the group and the set task was successfully achieved.
There were several aspects of designing the Responding to Others Interview I would change if I was to do it again, or work on a similar task. In further group work I would definitely consider assigning roles to the group. We decided not to have roles because we thought that we did not need them; however I think having specific roles may have made our meetings more productive and kept the group on task. I am still undecided on whether it would work to have a leader in the group; having a leader might make people feel less able to express their views because they know they do not have the final decision. There was no assigned leader in our group but people soon started to fill the role and as a result ideas were not always considered equally.
A further aspect of the interview I would reconsider is the questions. I would perhaps change the process of designing the questions, and also the questions themselves. The proposed method was for each group member to design a few questions which they felt would gain the desired responses from the interviewee. The advantage of this method was that we were able to create a wide range of questions from which we could then choose our specific interview questions. However, problems arose in choosing the questions because everybody tends to think that their own questions are good and should be used in the interview. I think if this style of task was presented to me again, I would consider assigning each group member a specific topic area which their question has to concern. Each person could then design questions relating to their own specific topic and then the group could vote on which of the questions was the best. This way the final set of questions would comprise of at least one question from each group member, whilst still allowing the group to have an overall say in which questions are used.
In my opinion our final questions were good but they could have been improved upon. I think each question succeeded in having a purpose behind it; for example question seven (see appendix 1) would have explored the interviewee's views on trust, honesty and confidentiality. However, I feel that some questions could have been more precise. We were trying to keep the questions open-ended, but I think questions such as number three and number six were actually quite ambiguous. Question three could be interpreted in many ways, the question was designed to find out about work accomplishments but the interviewee could easily interpret the question differently and talk about accomplishments that they may have had in other areas of their lives. In spite of some questions needing adjustments, I feel that overall the questions would elicit all the necessary information from the interviewee.
My contribution in the task was in both a personal and professional manner. I was the only member of the group in my field of study and so this often gave me differing views from other group members. However I have little experience and so often found other people's contributions more useful because they had more experience of scenarios such as being an interviewer or interviewee. I had little 'hands on' experience of the interview situation, but I had studied interview techniques both in psychology and sociology. This allowed me to contribute theory and concepts of interviews to the group. I was also able to contribute by helping members of group with using the internet, both for research or for accessing and using WebCT.
Each group member had different personal qualities which benefited the group. Some people's qualities enabled us to get the work done efficiently, whilst other people's qualities made the process of working together more comfortable and enjoyable. I tend to be a relaxed person and have a lot of experience of working in academic groups, so I think my contribution was also to keep the group calm and not get too anxious by thinking about time constraints and deadlines.
I am involved in or have been previously involved in many situations where it is important to work together; because of this I consider myself to have other personal qualities that would benefit a group. I am hardworking and organised an often find myself in a role of responsibility or leadership. In Sixth Form I was Chairperson of the Sixth Form Council which involved a lot of responsibility. I ran weekly meetings and together with the rest of the council, we organised various events for the Sixth Form or entire school. I have always found it easy to contribute to tasks and take on any role given to me. This is why I found it surprising that it seemed to be so difficult to make a valuable contribution to the group. I found myself feeling uncomfortable in the group and often unable to contribute. I feel the reasons behind this may have been related to the age differences within the group. I have worked with people of varying age in jobs before but never in an academic setting. This is something I will certainly look at to try and prevent it from causing difficulties in future tasks.