Following Greg's referral to Occupational Therapy (OT) on the ward, a risk assessment was carried out and then intervention planning could begin. Four over arching aims were written for Greg based on his strengths and needs identified using the Model Of Human Occupation (Kielhofner, 2002). Three long term goals were set to help Greg work towards his over arching aims and make them more achievable. In order to formulate the long term goals the Occupational Therapist (OT) met with Greg, his mother, Greg's Psychiatrist and Care Co-ordinator. This team approach ensured that everybody was working towards the same aims. Using a client centred approach, Greg was encouraged to have maximum input into the goal setting process in the hope that this would encourage and motivate him to engage in OT (Sumsion, 1999). The long term goals agreed were:
The first goal addresses the need for Greg to have more structure to his daily routine. This includes when he takes his medication, eats meals and participates in leisure activities. Greg was referred to OT to increase his motivation and participation as he had been spending a lot of time alone in his room, often sleeping. Changing sleep patterns will have affected Greg's motivation and his occupational performance overall (Creek, 2002). Introducing some structure to Greg's day should promote his involvement in more activities and hopefully increase his performance in all areas from self care to social participation. However, Greg is taking Clozaril which can have sedative effects and increase lethargy (Atchison & Hansen, 2000). The drug can also induce weight gain which relates to Greg's goal to participate in sports activities daily.
Since being on the unit Greg has occasionally played pool and football and his mother reported that he used to love sports. Since setting the goals Greg has been playing football every other day and has become involved in a pool tournament. Increased participation in these activities have improved Greg's fitness and motivation; although Clozaril can increase the risk of cardiac problems so Greg must be monitored regularly (Atchison & Hansen, 2000). Playing sports requires Greg to socialise with others. An increase in socialisation helps facilitate Greg's aims of transferring to a low secure unit and eventually returning to work or vocational training. Greg's final goal is for him to begin engaging in a work activity by the time he leaves the unit. If Greg transfers to a low secure unit or is discharged into the community it will be easier for him to start vocational rehabilitation or training; it is difficult at present due to the section he is on. Employment rates are low for those with mental illness but there are many schemes such as pre-vocational training or supported employment that Greg could aim to become involved in (Boardman, 2003). Greg was previously doing a building course at college which he enjoyed so hopefully he would be interested in preparing to work in this area. Greg's short term goals include making models and beginning to review his previous studies.
It must be appreciated how much Greg's culture will have changed since his admission to the unit. Previously Greg was living independently in a mixed society; he now lives on an all male ward where all the patient's have mental health problems as well as a criminal background. This is a dramatic change of culture and may contribute to Greg's isolation (Farnworth et al, 2004). Previous to admission Greg is likely to have felt socially excluded from society because of his mental illness. In societies there will always be 'cultural norms' such as to have a job, buy a house, and have relationships; these expectations may have left Greg feeling pressured if he was not doing these things. Work is seen to provide social identity and status (Boardman, 2003); Greg was not working which immediately excludes him from this social group. Greg has more recently been talking to the unit's Chaplain and has reported on several occasions that he is being instructed by God. Greg has strong religious beliefs and these must be respected throughout his intervention.
The Mental Health Act (MHA) 1983, is a legal document which outlines procedures and allows patients to be sectioned by a doctor for assessment and treatment (Turner 2005). Greg is currently on section 37/41; he has been convicted for arson and sent to the medium secure hospital unit rather than to prison because of his ongoing mental health problems. The section was renewed after the first six months and will now continue to be reviewed annually. Section 41 is a restriction order meaning Greg cannot leave the hospital without the Home Secretary's permission; this is because he is seen to pose a risk of harm to others.
Further policies to be considered are the National Service Frameworks (NSF's), these are not legal documents but are recognised national standards for healthcare. Their existence should ensure high quality treatment and decrease variations in service provision. They identify key interventions and include strategies to support the implementation of these interventions (DOH, 1999). The NSF supports the concepts of the Care Programme Approach (CPA) and the role of a Care Co-ordinator. The CPA involves both Greg and his carers in his care planning, ensures interventions are suited to his needs and promotes communication between all individuals and agencies involved in his care. All patients should have their mental health needs identified and be offered effective treatment; referrals to specialist services should be made if needed (Turner, 2005). Greg has been known to mental health services since he was eighteen, he has mainly been managed by the Community Mental Health Team (CMHT) but is currently in a medium secure mental health unit. The unit is thirty miles from his mother's house; where possible patient's are kept close to home so that links with friends, family and the community can be maintained or rebuilt. The NSF advises that patient's should live in the least restrictive environment consistent with the need to protect themselves and the public (DOH, 1999).
The CPA (1991) outlines processes to be used with patients. Following the referral a risk assessment was carried out with Greg to identify the risks to himself and others; and also the factors that may put Greg at risk of relapse. Relapse prevention is a psychosocial intervention which looks to identify the early warning signs of relapse and develop action plans in case of crisis (Harris et al, 2002); the warning signs and action plans are recorded in Greg's care plan. In the unit Greg is highly monitored but relapse prevention will become increasingly important as he begins to self-manage his care.
Under the CPA each patient has a Care Co-ordinator; it was decided that the Charge Nurse Jim would be best for this role as Greg has known him since admission and spends time on the ward with him. Jim's role is to promote good communication between Greg, his family, and the professional team; he is also responsible for ensuring that the care plan is regularly reviewed to suit Greg's changing needs and behaviours (Creek, 2002). The care plan also ensures that risk assessment is up to date in order to protect Greg and everybody who works with him. Greg is on an enhanced CPA as he has multiple care needs and is involved with several agencies including the criminal justice system (Creek, 2002). Greg has also been placed on the supervision register by his psychiatrist; the supervision register identifies people with mental illness who may be at significant risk to themselves or others. Greg's history of fire setting and non compliance with medication make him a significant risk. Thorough multi-disciplinary risk assessment must take place before the decision can be made to remove him from the register (Creek, 2002). When Greg leaves the secure unit in the future and is able to self-manage his mental health then he is likely to be reduced to a standard CPA as he is more stable and less agencies will be involved in his care.
The main person for the OT to liaise with is Jim. As care co-ordinator he communicates with the rest of the team and has the most involvement in Greg's care plan, communication with Greg's Psychiatrist will also be needed. Before his latest admission Greg was living independently with the support of the Community Mental Health Team (CMHT). Even though Greg is not due to be discharged, he is known to the CMHT and will be referred to them at the time of discharge (Crepeau, 2003). Greg will also receive support from a social worker regarding benefits and accommodation.
Greg's mother visits him monthly and he has a younger sister who has not visited since his admission a year ago. Even though he is not in close contact with them, liaison with Greg's family is an important part of his care. Greg can be very isolated and does not communicate with many people on the ward. He has recently been meeting with the Chaplain and is beginning to assist him with the running of services. It may be worth communicating with the Chaplain if Greg is being open with him; although this may raise confidentiality issues as he is not a member of the professional team.
Communication with the forensic services will also be needed to stay up to date with Greg's conviction and section status. The section 41 prevents him from leaving the hospital (DOH, 1999), this imposes limitations on treatment plans and further social inclusion. Much of Greg's future OT intervention and vocational training will depend on when he is discharged and where to, and whether he remains under a section of the Mental Health Act.