The rise in deaths due to infection in hospitals generates a need for research into the control of infection; including the area of hand washing. Human hands play a large role in the transmission of infection; hand washing is a simple but successful method of protecting patients from infections (UKCC, 1992). It has been identified that the problems with hand washing lie within the technique used not the hand washing agent (Larson, 1995). Evidence based practice is essential in healthcare which is why research must be completed before practice is changed (Barnard & Seale, 1998). It has been questioned whether the technique used in hand washing is the main factor in the effectiveness of soap based products; this study will investigate this issue using a quantitative approach.
Research Question - Does the hand washing technique used by health professionals affect how successfully they remove bacteria from their hands?
Aim - To find out if a new hand washing technique is more effective in removing bacteria from the hands than the existing hand washing technique.
Objectives - To teach a group of healthcare professionals a new hand washing technique.
- To test the effectiveness of two hand washing techniques by counting bacteria left on the hands in a laboratory based experiment.
- To establish the significance of the results therefore determining which technique is most effective.
Alternate hypothesis - There will be a significant difference in the number of bacteria left on the hands depending on which hand washing technique has been used. (Two-tailed).
Null hypothesis - There will be no significant difference in the number of bacteria left on the hands depending on which hand washing technique has been used.
The research uses a randomised controlled trial (RCT) which is an unrelated-subject experimental design. Using a RCT allows the researcher to see the effect of a treatment or intervention, usually establishing cause and effect. The experiment is carried out in an attempt to reject the null hypothesis thus support the alternate hypothesis (Hicks, 2002). The design will use two groups; an experimental group and a control group (known as the experimental arm and the control arm). It is important that both arms come from the same population and are as identical as possible, except for the intervention which they are receiving. The experimental arm will receive training on a new technique of hand washing. The control group will not receive this training and will wash their hands according to their existing method of hand washing.
Independent variable - the hand washing technique used.
Dependent variable - the number of bacteria left on the right hand after washing.
A large number of participants should be used in order to increase the external validity of the study, allowing generalisation of results to the population (Gleitman, Fridlund & Reisberg, 2004). For such large clinical trials, a statistician will be consulted for power calculations working out how many participants should be involved. It is likely that approximately three hundred participants will be used.
Six hospitals will be chosen at random from around the UK and approximately fifty participants will be selected from each hospital, depending on the power calculation. In each hospital, a computer will randomly select the participants from a staff list. Permission is needed to gain access to these. Random sampling will increase external validity and ideally represent the whole population.
Once sampling is completed and consent given by the participants, the hospitals will be randomly allocated to the experimental or control arm of the study. Randomisation ensures there is an equal chance of each hospital being allocated to either arm. The participants will be allocated in hospital groups so all participants in that hospital will be using the same technique. Separating the arms will increase validity, as the experimental arm will be unable to discuss the study with the control arm, leading to knowledge of the technique being passed on.
To randomly allocate the hospitals, six envelopes will be randomly sent by a third party informing the hospitals which arm they are participating in. This method ensures there is no selection bias, and the researcher will be unaware which hospitals are in which arm of the study. When using unrelated-subjects the groups of participants should be equivalent at the baseline therefore matched for confounding variable such as age, gender and socio-economic status. This is essential so that differences in the outcomes become attributable to the intervention and not to inherent differences between participant groups. Random selection should ensure the groups are similar; however there may still be anomalies. Therefore once participants have been selected, the group's characteristics will be checked, for example to check the group is not all male doctors.
Blinding will be used so the researcher does not know which participants are in which arm of the study; limiting the risk of researcher bias. Those collecting the data will also be unaware of participant's allocation. Participant blinding is not practical due to the nature of the intervention.
The intervention received by the three hospitals in the experimental arm is the teaching of a new hand washing technique. The technique will be taught in a laboratory with standardised instructions thus ensuring the study is replicable. Participants in the control arm will not receive training and will continue to use their existing technique.
Confounding variables should be manageable as the study is laboratory based. It is easier to control the surrounding environment because it will be the same for each study. Confounding variables relating to participant characteristics cannot be easily controlled; however using a random sampling method should ensure that the groups are all comparable meaning it is less of an issue.
Once training is completed, participants will be tested in the laboratory. They will be asked to wash their hands using a soap-based hand washing product with the technique assigned to their arm. They will be asked to place their right hand flat in a petri dish; this method of data collection has been chosen as opposed to using swabs as it is easier to replicate. Participants will be instructed and observed by a third party who have no involvement in the analysis of results. Before the experiment each participant will be randomly allocated a number and their petri dishes will be labelled with this. This is so they can be analysed in no particular order and maintain anonymity.
The outcome measure is the number of bacteria on the right hand after washing. The number of bacteria in the dishes will be recorded for each participant; counted and verified by two people to avoid human error thus increasing reliability. The data collected will be interval data as the numbers have real value, are continuous, and can be manipulated.
At this stage the results will be matched with the participants to compare the two arms. Distribution curves will be drawn for each arm and measures of central tendency calculated. The mean (average), the median (the central number in ordered data), and the mode (the most frequent number) will be displayed on the curve (Hicks, 2002). If these measures all fall on the centre of the curve then the data has a normal distribution and parametric statistical tests can be used; if not then the data is said to be skewed and non-parametric tests must be used. With a normal distribution the standard deviation will be calculated; the smaller this value is the more meaningful the results are (Polgar & Thomas, 2000).
The statistical test most likely to be used is the T test (unrelated),as the study uses one variable, two experimental conditions, and different participants in each condition. The data collected is interval data meaning that a parametric statistical test can be used; however this assumes the data has a normal distribution.
Probability tables will be used to gain a p value; this value shows how likely it is that the results occurred purely by chance (Hicks, 2002). The level of probability accepted in this study is p<0.05; there is a one in twenty chance that results occurred by random chance. Increasing the level of significance would makes results more meaningful however could make a type I error by accepting the null hypothesis when there are actually significant differences. The large number of participants and the ability to control confounding variables should mean a type II error would not be made by accepting the alternate hypothesis when there are in fact no significant differences.
All participants will be given a fully detailed information sheet to gain informed consent, there must be no coercion of participants. A full risk assessment will be performed and indemnity held by Oxford Brookes. Participant details and results will be treated and stored confidentially and anonymously. Participants may withdraw from the study at any time (British Psychological Society, 1998).
The main ethical issue in this research is whether it is ethical for the control group not to receive the advanced hand washing training. However this group are not uneducated and will be treating their patients using the existing method. The experimental group will not use the new technique in practice until research is complete as there is currently no evidence to suggest it is an advanced method.
The experimental arm will have had more recent hand washing training which may influence how strictly they follow the technique thus influencing the results. A further confounding variable may come from having numerous instructors of the technique, however the use of standardised instructions should limit this. The study has low external validity due to it being laboratory based, however numerous steps have been taken to increase external validity and reliability.
The research will be published as it may provide evidence for professionals to change their practice. Interpretation of results must be as objective as possible and any validity and reliability issue made clear (Hicks, 2002).