Infection within hospitals is an increasing problem in the UK. The public are becoming more aware of 'super bugs' such as MRSA, and there is increasing pressure on healthcare professionals to take more action to limit the spread of infection and increase awareness of infection control. In 2003 MRSA was mentioned on 955 death certificates, compared to 487 in 1999 (BBC News Website, 2005). The rise in deaths due to infection in hospitals generates a need for research into the control of infection; including the area of hand hygiene. Human hands play a large role in the transmission of infection; hand washing is a simple but successful method of protecting patients from infections. Health professionals have a duty to identify the risks and take the appropriate action to minimise them, the attention to hand hygiene is paramount (UKCC, 1992). Both healthcare professionals and patients would benefit from more research into this area; especially due to the increasing importance of evidence based practice. Extensive research would need to be completed into previous literature in order to find an area which has not been researched before, or alternatively some research which could be extended. The literature would be critically reviewed to highlight its strengths and weaknesses.
Qualitative research is subjective and holistic; you have close personal interaction with participants within the context of their social environment (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000). The emphasis is on the experience of the individual which is why it is the best form of research for this particular research question. Qualitative research allows for in-depth research and is an inductive process in that a theory is often developed rather than an existing theory being tested. The disadvantages of a qualitative research method are that it can be lengthy and expensive which usually results in smaller samples of participants being used. It is also harder to control variables and is subjective due to the researcher being inside the research setting (Silverman, D., 1997).
There are several approaches to qualitative research; this research question uses the phenomenological approach. The research approach chosen affects the participant selection, type of data collected and data analysis. Phenomenology originates from philosophy, sociology and psychology, and is concerned with understanding the essence of experiences about a phenomenon in context (Creswell, J. W., 1998). It emphasises the need to understand the nature of human consciousness and that different people experience the world in different ways; therefore it is important to see things from other people's perspectives (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S., 2000). This methodology is appropriate to the research question because it is the people's personal experiences that are being researched and they are all experiencing the same phenomenon.
Before any participants become involved in the research, a full risk assessment will be carried out in order to identify any potential harm to either the participants or the researcher; sensitive issues may arise in interviews that could potentially cause the participant emotional distress (Eyesenck, M. W. & Flanagan, C., 2001). It should also be clear who holds indemnity in case of insurance issues. All participants will be volunteers and not coerced into taking part in the research with the offer of any inducement such as money. The participants will be selected as a sample of the population; the population being all healthcare professionals.
The participants will be chosen using a stratified random sampling method; this method ensures that the sample represents all groups within the population proportionally (Crepeau, E. B., Cohn, E. S. & Schell, B. A. B. (Eds.)., 2003). For example, if there were thirty nurses, fifteen doctors and five physiotherapists in a population, then the sample should consist of 60% nurses, 30% doctors and 10% physiotherapists. It is important to use a group that is representative of the population in order to maintain validity and allow extrapolation (Gleitman, H., Fridlund, A., J. & Reisberg, D., 2004); the findings of this research would need to be generalised to other in-patient settings, not just the one the research was performed in. The use of random sampling should ensure a diverse mix of participants, it will also be more representative of the population than an incidental sample and so allows a smaller sample to be used (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000).
An exact sample size is not going to be decided for the research; however the sample will not be too large due to the lengthy processes involved in semi-structured interviews. Not having a pre-determined sample size will allow for flexibility and if saturation of the topic arises early then not all participants may be interviewed; however if not all participants are interviewed it will still be ensured that the stratified sample contains the correct representations. If a decision is made at any point to increase the number of participants then material sampling may be carried out and certain interviews chosen to be further transcribed and interpreted.
The method of data collection is a semi-structured interview. Interviews are suited to qualitative research as they can examine complex issues and gain understanding of an individual's experiences. Before the interview takes place the participant will be provided with an information sheet explaining the purpose of the research and the parts of the research process that they will be involved in; they must then sign a document declaring their informed consent to participate in the research. The participant will then be fully aware of the intended research and no deception of any kind will occur. The interview will take place in a quiet room away from the hospital setting and will involve just the researcher and the participant. The interview is to be carried out away from the hospital setting in order to help the participant feel more at ease and hopefully discuss topics more openly and truthfully.
The semi-structured interview will comprise of standardised open-ended questions which should elicit in-depth information from the participants. The researcher will guide the interview to some extent but the participant will have a more active role than if participating in a structured interview (Keats, D. M., 2000). However, less structure can result in the interview going 'off track' and so the interviewer will have prompts ready if the participant's responses are too vague; these prompts will help to guide the interview. Standardised questions will be used to increase reliability and validity, if the questions were not standardised then it would be very difficult to replicate the research. Trustworthy research should be replicable, have an absence of bias, and have findings which are applicable to other contexts or participants (Krefting, L, 1991). A semi-structured interview is time consuming and requires the interviewer to have good interview and communication skills, the questions also need to be carefully considered and be of relevance to the research question. Good questions should be direct, unambiguous, use straightforward vocabulary, and be free from bias (Stanton, N., 2004). The areas that the interview will include are:
At the end of the interview participants will be thoroughly debriefed and given the opportunity to ask any questions they may have. The participants will also be given the right to withdraw their data from the research at any time. All the data collected will be made anonymous and will be securely stored and strictly confidential.
Semi-structured interviews produce large quantities of in-depth data; the interviews will therefore be recorded so that the entire interview can be later transcribed. This method has greater reliability and validity compared to the researcher simply taking unstructured notes, as this may lead to biased data recording or important data being omitted (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000 ). Reliability and validity are important if the research is to be generalised to other situations. To increase validity, Guba, E. G. & Lincoln, Y. S. (1983, as cited in Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000 ) recommend triangulation. This involves pitting against each other different data and theoretical interpretations to provide cross-checks of observations and interpretations. To achieve this an external researcher could be introduced to interpret the interview data as well as the main researcher; any interviewer bias would then hopefully be eliminated.
Once enough data has been collected from the interviews, transcripts will be made and then data analysis can begin. The data analysis approach will be thematic analysis; this uses coding to organise the data collected in the interview and identify common themes (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000). The main themes within the interviews will be identified and categorised, supported by information from the interview including quotations from the original transcripts. All participants must give informed consent for their direct quotes to be used in this way. Once themes are identified, a number or label is then assigned to each category and their positions in the transcript are recorded, a thematic matrix can then be established which groups and links the data (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000). Computer software may be used to facilitate the process of coding analysis as it can be a lengthy process when large quantities of data are involved. Having coded the transcripts the researcher then interprets their meanings in the context in which they appeared.
Having completed the analysis and interpretation of the data the researcher will decide whether they have successfully answered the research question. The research is then ready for dissemination and can be shared with the community of healthcare professionals and health scientists (Polgar, S., & Thomas, S. A., 2000). The most common form of doing this is to report the results at a professional conference and it is an ethical requirement that the research results are reported accurately and honestly. The research will then be critically appraised by experts before it can be formally published.