In writing the way of Truth, Parmenides sets out his concept of reality based on what he can deduce a priori, using his mind with reason or logos as his guide. His path of thought is portrayed through a journey in a hexmeter verse proem modelled on Hesiod's Theogeny, in which he travels from the 'dark' world of the unaware mortals to the light of knowledge which encompasses both unaltering truth and mortal opinion. Although the barrier to his attainment of this knowledge is strong, 'the gates of 'night and day' can be parted through 'gentle argument'. From this he concludes that 'being' is all there is, persuing a radically monistic doctrine. In contrast to this, he presents the Way of Seeming, created using sensory experience of reality, which he states is 'deceitful' as his senses tell him information about reality which is subject to change, which appears to compromise the singularity of his view of being. Although being is an essential property of things, this is revealed only to the mind (nous), so is only revealed in the Way of Truth. Thus, the Way of Truth is the only option which he asserts is possible. However, although The Way of Truth is not intended to be deceitful, the views advanced in it are highly paradoxical, which shows that reliance on pure reason alone can produce contradictory conclusions as Parmenides theory ultimately proves itself to be self-refuting. Parmenides acknowledges that the Way of Seeming is untrustworthy which suggests he has a specific purpose in writing it, however there are several possible reasons he could have had for its inclusion.
One potential explanation for Parmenides' inclusion of the professedly misleading Way of Seeming is that it has a role in validating the logical mode of enquiry endorsed in the Way of Truth and exposes the fallacies of sensory experience or 'aesthesis', which tells us that objects or 'pragmata' have numerous different properties wheras in the way of Truth the most essential property is accessible through the 'nous'; they all form part of being. In his argument for the singularity of being, Parmenides first assumes that there are two mutually exclusive possibilities for any subject of enquiry, either it-is or it-is-not, in obeyance of the rule of non-contradiction. He then assumes 'you think', a precursor to Descartes' cogito. From this he deduces that you either think esti or ouk esti as these are exclusive, however, it is impossible to think 'ouk esti' so you must think 'esti'. He believes that whatever you think has some form of reality, entities participate in the greater being and are necessarily related to our minds or nous, one does not occur without the other . From this conclusion, Parmenides goes on to argue that creation is impossible as this would mean that being would once have had to not exist which cannot be thought. Therefore, the Way of Seeming appears to require him to use negative senses of 'esti' which he believes are impossible. As Nothing can have true existence except what is conceivable, Parmenides sees 'is it or is it not?' as equivalent to 'can it be thought or not' as stated by Kirk Raven and Schofield. Thus, the Way of Truth appears to be the only path available, and 'must be'.
However an alternative perspective to this is raised by the fact that the Way of Seeming is constructed on the assumption that humans can confuse 'esti' and 'ouk esti'. This implies that it could be employed in order to highlight the erroneous route humans take in not differentiating between two mutually exclsive paths. Their path is thus condemned to be 'back-turning' as they erringly wander 'two-headed'. However, it only confuses esti in the predicative sense, rather than the existential which is what we ultimately cannot think. So strictly speaking, the Way of Truth is not contradicted as one can think 'not tall' without thinking 'not being'. This introduces the issue of whether Parmenides is aware of this distinction. If it is assumed that this is so, the version of himself projected in the poem may be as the nave young Philosopher, distinct from the authorial self aware of the inconsistency.
To decide which interpretation of esti is favoured in the fragments, Kirk Raven and Scofield suggest that is it necessary to analyse the arguments which have esti at their core. One of the foremost of these is the argument against negative enquiry. Parmenides states that 'it is not to be though what is not' and deduces from this that coming into being and perishing are also impossible as for something to come into being it must once have not been, and so it would have been possible at that juncture to say that 'it is not' which is forbidden by the premiss 'you cannot think nothing' so coming into being is impossible. Thus, in this context, 'come to be' is intended to mean 'come to exist' so here an existential sense of esti is being employed.
Parmenides then goes on to refer to what does not exist as 'the nothing', this suggests that he is interprets non existence as 'being nothing at all', ie having no predication, so here a predicative sense of esti is also being introduced. Further on, he uses 'eon' to stand for being which is more readily translated as 'reality' than as only 'existence', and what qualifies something for being real is that it is able to satisfy some predicates eg occupies space. If this analysis is true, then Parmenides' use of esti is simultaneously existential and predicative, but not therefore confused. This duality could be seen to suggest the link between the way of Seeming in which predication is allowed and the Way of Truth in which only existential readings of esti are allowed and there is only being. This twofold use of esti could be a pedagogical technique employed to encourage his listeners to re-assess their own beliefs and notice the contradiction involved in not differentiating between the two ways. The blurring of the senses of esti in the text imply that the Way of Seeming may not be entirely false as the Way of Truth may ultimately look similar to it, revealing the relationship between appearance and reality.
Another interpretation advocated by some scholars is that the Way of Seeming is 'an account of Pythagorean cosmology', a world composed of elements 'distinct from one another- one form the bright fire of flame'; and the other 'as impenetrable night' which would entail a discontinuous reality. It has been suggested that the mistaken beliefs of The Way of Seeming are not intended to reflect the average person's view of the universe but rather forms a complex system which represents the progression of Ionian cosmology such as that advocated by Pythagoras. This has been questioned by some who feel that is unlikely that Parmenides would espouse a system which he wholeheartedly disagreed with, although it is possible that this method would be in keeping with certain rhetorical techniques of the apocalyptic convention of verse which the Proem is influenced by. It is significant that Parmenides uses the mouthpiece of the Goddess to express these 'mortal' views, rather than the character of himself, thus distancing himself from the opinions put forward which go against his monistic view of being in seeing the world as consisting of opposing elements. The journey of Parmenides to the attainment of transcendent knowledge is elaborated by this cosmological description of the realm from which his soul has escaped. This domain is described in terms which reveal its unacceptability to The Way of Truth, 'light and night are given all names' and celestial bodies are 'predicated of this and that in accordance with their powers', using esti in ways which require is-not, ie is not light. The Goddess stands at this diverging path and impels Parmenides to avoid this view point. As Kirk Raven and Scofield assert, Parmenides' epistemology and metaphysics leave no scope for cosmologies as they dismiss belief in 'the world our senes disclose to us'. However, it is also possible that this allusion to Pythagoras also shows how his emphasis on the power of thought as a mathematician has influenced Parmenides' view that 'It is the same thing that can be though and that can be', further reiterating the connections between the Way of Seeming and The Way of Truth.
The inclusion of the Way of Seeming could be seen in opposition to the initial argument as drawing attention to the flaws in the Way of Truth. By following what he can deduce through first principles alone, Parmenides has reached a highly paradoxical conclusion. The paradox lies in the fact that his theory appears to be self- refuting; thinking esti would be thinking ouk ouk esti which would be a negative statement, the Way of Truth 'cannot not be' as expressed by Waterfield. The contradictory conclusion of this argument would entail a world devoid of predication, an unmediated mass in which the existence of both Parmenides and the Goddess would be impossible. He may then be asserting that human beings have no choice other than to perceive reality through the information they gain through their senses. This world is illusory but it is the one humans inhabit. The knowledge we gain from sensory experience may be valued by Parmenides as offering a different insight to that of reason. Although his meaning is made ambiguous by his use of a poetic form, Parmenides may be alluding to a similar distinction to that viewed by Plato, between different types of reason and knowledge, 'both the unwavering heart of well-lit truth and the opinions of mortals', which relate to different 'objects of knowledge', and suggesting that the method used depends on the context it is being used in.
The Way of Seeming may also have a role in highlighting the importance of linguistics in Parmenides' theory. In the Way of Seeming, Parmenides may be acknowledging the value of sensory data in understanding aspects of the world which humans inhabit, although conceding that it is misleading in uncovering the deeper metaphysical truths which lie beneath the sensory appearances. He suggests that human concepts such as 'creation and perishing' are ruled out through logical deduction so have no foundation in being and are merely 'names'. Movement and change are merely conventions which mortals perceive the world by, they are what Parmenides would describe as 'nomos'. However, it is through language that humans are able to give structure to their thoughts in the 'nous' and construct arguments which have produced the logical deduction on which the Way of Truth is based. Another possibility with relation to linguistics, is that Parmenides has realised the impossibility of expressing such a monistic theory in language, as will later be concluded by Plato in the Thaetetus. To advocate that there can only be being and that no negative statements are possible instantly becomes self refuting as the statement iself is the negation of the negative statement. This would mean that the Way of Seeming is inextricably bound up with the Way of Truth as it is through human language that he must express his thoughts.
However, following on from the self refuting nature of Parmenides' theory, it could be argued that the Way of Seeming leaves Parmenides in a state of aporia. The dilemma expressed by Democritus in his dialogue between sense and reason is evoked, in which the senses call the mind 'wretched' for relying on them to perceive the world then dismissing them as untrustworthy . Reason is telling him that his senses are telling him that he can think 'ouk esti' which he sees as inconceivable. The impasse reached through both paths of enquiry emphasises the limitations of both what have come to be called empiricism and rationalism in analysing reality. This could explain why the Godess describes truth as 'circular' as in attempting to comprehend reality, we alternate between the two poles of reason and sense data, neither of which are able to fully elucidate the situation. Perhaps Parmenides believes both modes are indispensable to our understanding. This is highlighted in the Godesses' assertion in F1 that Parmenides will 'come to see how beliefs must exist in an acceptable form, all-pervasive as they altogether are'.
It is conceivable that Parmenides' conclusion is that starting from first principles is a flawed method of conducting philosophical enquiry due to the fact that as mortals, all the apparatus humans have for interpreting reality comes from their unreliable senses, so they are unable to ever know which first principles to choose. This impasse is shown clearly in the fact that the Way of Truth requires Parmenides to think not being as esti is ouk ouk esti which is a negative statement in an existential sense, yet The Way of Seeming makes similar demands of him as it includes statement such as hot/cold day/night etc which involve negative predication. Aristotle noted this incongruity and identified a difference between things which are known to us and things which are known absolutely. This contradiction suggests that philosophers, belonging inescapably to a realm knowable only through sense perception, are forced to begin from the facts gained through experience. They can then use these as a base from which to progress, through argument, towards things known absolutely. Finally from this new position, they can work backwards to what is known in the sensory world and appraise which first principles are compatible with it. Kirk and Raven contend that like Heraclitus, Parmenides' dualism between Being and Seeming is balanced by the unity of his initial insight, 'truth as a well rounded whole'. Perhaps this is ultimately what Parmenides is supporting in writing the Way of Seeming, when he asserts that 'the point from which I start is common; for there shall I return again'.