In this paper, I will reflect on a taped first interview with a 33 year old client, John, who sustained a brain injury in a car accident and had recently been discharged from hospital. This injury affected his long-term memory meaning he was unable to work and was living with his parents, previously having lived in a flat. I will look at how I tried to build a therapeutic relationship, focussing on good points and areas for improvement, to guide me in future work
I gave a good introduction, introducing myself, my role and explaining the purpose of the meeting and its confidential nature. I tried to put the client at ease, giving him the opportunity to ask questions at any stage. In introduction, let the client know the interview purpose, introduce yourself, saying you are an occupational therapist, and explain your role and the types of questions you will use (Henry 2003: 292).
Throughout I asked several open questions, enabling the client to give expansive answers. I also asked some closed questions which could have been open as I wasn't using them to clarify specific issues. I didn't use a succession of closed questions, but the ones used could have led the client and I was lucky he gave more than a yes or no answer. For example instead of, "Do you feel you would like to go back to it if you could?" (his job), I could have said "What did you enjoy about your job and what would make you want to return?" Too many closed questions can make the relationship seem like an interrogation and inhibit the client's telling of his story (Burnard 2005:151). Open questions are more preferable, encouraging more expansive answers and being freer of value judgements and interpretation than closed questions (Burnard 2005:152).
An area for improvement was my ability to stay with the client's feelings. For example, I asked how he had been feeling since hospital discharge and he mentioned things had been difficult and it was taking longer for him to recover than he expected, also alluding to long term memory problems. Rather than jumping to another question, I could have drawn him out on his response to the first. For example, "Where is your long term memory causing you problems?" and/or "Why are you finding things difficult?"
Clarification would have been useful at several points as it would have encouraged the client to expand. For example, when he said, "It would be nice to go back to that environment, but whether that will happen, I don't know", (referring to his work), again, I changed subject. I could have said, "What makes you feel you won't be able to return to that environment?"
I used empathy building and paraphrasing several times, which reassured the client I was listening. For example, "Yes, so you are saying that in the circumstances, you are getting on well with your parents?" However, I did concentrate too much on this technique, meaning I didn't always use it appropriately. A better question than the one above, might have been the use of reflection, for example, "It is not ideal........." to draw him out on why living at home with his parents wasn't ideal, or using another technique, "What aspects of living at home with your parents is not ideal?" Reflection involves reflecting back the last few of the client's words, or a paraphrase of them, to encourage him to say more. The counsellor echoes the client's thoughts and uses them as a prompt (Burnard 2005:154).
Mostly I listened well and showed the client, by nodding and responding verbally. I tried to maintain an empathetic, professional tone, which helped to put him at ease. Of empathy Burnard and Kendrick say, "The person tries to imagine how it is to be the other person" (1998: 44). At times the client hesitated and there were pauses, but I resisted the temptation to jump in, allowing him time. However, sometimes I was preoccupied with my response and didn't listen fully enough, which meant that my next question wasn't the most appropriate, or as mentioned above, I didn't remain with the client's feelings. One of the barriers to listening is that "You become preoccupied with your responses rather than the client's revelations" (Egan cited in Burnard 2005:142).
I used summarisation successfully, near the interview end, to recap with the client what had been said. However there was one negative statement within this, "Depending upon how you regain, or don't regain your long-term memory". This could have seemed slightly demoralising for the client. In future I will omit such statements or frame them more positively.
I ended the interview well, explaining next steps, and ensuring the client knew the process was focussed on his needs and goals. I mentioned I would investigate a brain injury support group, which helped assure him, I would work on something concrete before we met again, and I asked if he wished to comment on the process. "Make sure that you allow sufficient time to summarise information, identify important themes in the client's story and address how you and the client will work together........ As the interview comes to an end, you should let the client know what the next steps will be and when you will see him or her again" (Henry 2003:292).
So to conclude, I used listening skills reasonably well, maintaining a calming, welcoming tone and allowing the client to take his time. I also introduced and ended the session appropriately and allowed him to ask questions. I used the techniques of paraphrasing, empathy building and summarising.
However areas for improvement are:
Use reflection and clarification, to stay with the client's feelings and get him/her to expand, rather than jumping to another subject.
Always concentrate on listening, rather than thinking about my response.
Avoid the use of negative statements to avoid de-motivating the client, and if possible rephrase these positively.
Use open questions where possible, unless asking for specific information.