Averil is aged eight and is in middle childhood, between early childhood and early adolescence (Berger 2005:267). In this stage children develop confidence in their physical abilities, learning to do such things as skip, jump and ride a bicycle and lose the stiffness and unsteadiness of early childhood (Bee 1999:328). They are in the healthiest life stage and exhibit growing independence and a need to be with friends (Berger 2005:267). In this essay there will be an exploration of Averil's anatomical and physiological development and links to her occupational performance, her environment and her life stage of middle childhood. The essay will follow her physical growth, her musculoskeletal, brain and nervous system development, the effect of her asthma, and explore her diet and obesity risks.
Averil will be getting taller, growing more slowly and steadily than in early childhood. Children aged six to twelve grow approximately five centimetres annually and become slimmer and better proportioned. Their legs lengthen, posture improves and they use their limbs more efficiently (Chamley et al 2005:29-30). Most of the weight gain in middle childhood is due to the increased size of the growing skeleton and muscles (Santrock 1998:178). Bone ossification is a continuing process occurring in all bones, but particularly the end of long bones and in the feet (Bee 1999:336) (Bailey et al cited in Bee 1999:336).
Before Averil was born the cartilage in her long bones would have been transforming into bone from the centre of the shaft outwards, and after her birth the epiphyseal plates, (the secondary bone-forming centres), would have developed across the end of her long bones. Bone lengthening would have continued at these centres throughout infancy and early childhood and will continue through middle childhood and into her teens. In ossification the osteoblasts (bone-building cells), produce the matrix, (the material between the cells), which contains collagen, a strengthening fibrous protein. Calcium compounds are deposited in the matrix assisted by the hormone calcitonin and vitamin D. Once the matrix has hardened the cells stay inside the lacunae, (the small spaces in the matrix). These cells are now called osteocytes and they continue living and maintaining existing bone matrix. As Averil's long bones lengthen the shafts will be remodelled by multi-nucleated osteoclasts, which are responsible for the resorption, (breakdown), of bone tissue during growth and remodelling. This allows shaft widening and central marrow cavity growth (Janson Cohen 2005:124).
Averil's occupational performance is important in bone ossification. Weight-bearing physical activity can increase bone mass in children (French et al 2000:723) and includes any activity in which bones are subjected to gravity, or any standing activity (Gutin and Kasper 1992:55-69) such as Averil's gym sessions and play in the park. Her bone calcium level needs to increase before early adulthood, as after she will be unable to increase it. After about thirty-five years of age bone calcium starts falling, particularly in women, and if it drops under a certain level osteoporosis results. By accumulating good calcium levels by early adulthood, Averil will prolong the period before osteoporosis onset (Bee 1999:336). She will also need a diet with adequate calcium (Bee 1999:336). It is unclear whether she has enough calcium in her diet but regularly eating sausage, pizza and chips is unhealthy.
In middle childhood muscles strengthen and their mass increases as 'baby fat' decreases. One reason for Averil's improvement on the beam is because she is losing the loose movements of early childhood and developing increased muscle tone (Santrock: 1998:178). The exercise will help accelerate that process.
Brain development and maturation occurs between birth and approximately twenty years of age. Averil's brain would have grown to about 90% of full size by the time she was five, and will now be slowly growing, reaching adult size by the time she is about ten. Between six and eight years old there is a brain growth spurt (Chamley et al 2005:116-117). Within this there are developments that have implications for Averil and her occupational performance. In middle childhood the brain continues some of the development begun in early childhood. The corpus callosum which connects the two hemispheres of the brain, directing left-right co-ordination, the prefrontal cortex which has executive functions, and the cerebellum, which co-ordinates skilled movements and regulates posture and balance, all continue maturing (Berger 2005: 271-272) (Tortora and Grabowski 1996:403). Cognitive and motor developments occurring are closely interrelated with the cerebellum and the pre-frontal cortex working together (Diamond 2000:50).
Virtually all neurones and neuroglia are already formed at birth and during the child's first two years there is enormous growth of the dendrites, axons and terminal fibres of neurones, creating many synapses. Thereafter a significant brain and nervous system development, beginning in the few months after birth and continuing through Averil's lifestage and into adolescence, is synaptic pruning. This happens at different times throughout the brain and is not fully understood (Bee 1997:100-101). It links to Averil's cognitive development through automisation, whereby thoughts or actions are repeated numerous times and become automatic. This means that the neurones that 'fire' together will develop a permanent pathway becoming strengthened and other connections will be lost (Berger 2005:272) (Casey et al 2000:246). Averil demonstrates automisation by improving on the beam with practice.
The number of neurone axons within the nervous system that become myelinated increases from birth to maturity (Tortora and Grabowski 1996:403). Myelin is a multi-layered lipid and protein covering produced by neuroglia (cells that support and protect neurones) (Tortora and Grabowski 1996:332-334). The order of nerve myelinisation follows a pattern. The nerves between Averil's sensory organs and brain will probably be completely myelinated, but the pathways between her brain and skeletal muscles and some of the neurones within her brain, for example in the frontal cortex, will not yet be fully myelinated (Shaffer 1999:158).
These brain and nervous system developments are affecting Averil's occupational performance. Her fine motor skills and hand eye coordination are improving (Chamley et al 2005:117). She can write neatly when working on her school project, she is more adept on the beam at the gym and can cook a meal. She demonstrates increased perseverance and selective attention by focussing on her school project for a concentrated period and completing it without distraction, something a younger child could not accomplish. This results from the prefrontal cortex and cerebellum development in Averil's brain. Also her ability to coordinate demands from various parts of her brain whilst being selectively attentive requires myelination and increased production of neurotransmitters, which carry nervous impulses across synapses between neurones. Myelination will also make automisation quicker and easier and shorten her reaction time as nerve impulses travel quicker down myelinated nerve axons (Berger 2005:272-273). Averil's time playing in the park is a particularly important occupation for brain development. Studies have shown that play aids motor skills and emotional regulation and helps regulate and coordinate the frontal lobes of the brain (Panksepp 1998 cited in Berger 2005:273) (Pellegrini and Smith cited in Berger 2005:273).
Averil experiences environmental stressors, which could trigger her asthma and are affecting her ability to engage in her occupation of attending gym classes. Her lungs will have completed the majority of their development, but will still be changing, making her more susceptible to these stressors. When she was born her lungs would have contained approximately 20% of the alveoli of fully developed lungs but by her current age they should have all formed. However her lungs, including the alveoli, airways, interstitial tissues and pleura, will still be growing. Growth finishes at approximately eighteen years old (Thurlbeck 1982:564-572).
Asthma symptoms are caused by reversible changes, including airway inflammation and muscle spasms in the bronchial tubes, which constricts them impeding airflow. The sufferer experiences breathlessness and sometimes wheezing (Janson Cohen 2005:377). It is unclear which allergen causes Averil's asthma, but she experiences a number of possible triggers, including her stepfather's smoking, her hamster, an overcrowded house and city pollution. Her gym exercise can trigger attacks, but she must not let this deter her from exercising, as physical exercise can improve cardiopulmonary fitness in asthma and is not detrimental to lung function (Ram et al 2006).
In middle childhood, there can be obesity concerns. Not all obese children become obese adults, but the risk increases if a child is obese (Santrock 1998: 181). It is unclear if Averil has any propensity towards obesity, but by developing the habit of eating a high fat diet in childhood she is increasing her obesity risk. Obesity increases the possibility of contracting cardiovascular disease, hypertension, pulmonary disease, type II diabetes, arthritis, certain cancers, varicose veins and gallbladder disease (Tortora and Grabowski 1996:842). Coronary artery disease is a particular risk. Fatty material called plaque accumulates in coronary artery linings causing thickening and hardening and a loss of elasticity, a process called atherosclerosis. This causes ischemia, which is a reduced blood supply to the areas those arteries feed. Also there may be damage to artery walls causing roughening on the vascular surface, promoting blood clot formation (Jansen Cohen 2005:296). Studies have shown that atherosclerosis begins in childhood (Zieske et al 2002:232). Undertaking regular gym exercise and play in the park will however help Averil prevent obesity as 'one half hour of vigorous exercise at least four times a week is recommended for health and weight control' (Janson Cohen 2005:415). As an asthmatic it is important that Averil avoids obesity, as it could worsen her asthma (Shore 2006:230).
This essay has focussed on Averil, an eight-year-old girl within middle childhood, her anatomical and physiological development including some of her health risks, her occupational performance and her environment. Her physical growth has been explored, followed her musculoskeletal system development and the effect of her occupations and diet on this. Then her brain and nervous system development was examined and its effects on her occupational performance. Finally the effect of environmental stressors on her asthma and her health risks from a high fat diet were discussed.