Averil is aged eight and in middle childhood, between early childhood and early adolescence (Berger 2005:267), a time when children are generally motivated to learn (Berger 2005:289), becoming more independent, increasing in competence and developing ongoing friendships (Berger 2005:313). This essay will focus on Averil's occupational performance, environment and life stage, and links will be made between these and theories which could explain them. Firstly divorce, blended families and parenting style will be examined, followed by Averil's educational chances, as school is central in middle childhood. Then her learning, personality and cognitive development, and finally friendships, will be explored.
Averil has experienced her parent's divorce and is now in a blended family. The definition of this is 'a household including children born to several families, such as the biological children from the spouses' previous marriages and the biological children of the new couple' (Berger 2005:326). Many children experience stress through their parent's divorce, but it can remove them from conflict and many survive the process relatively well (Santrock 1998:489). Averil's mum, and therefore Averil, seems happier now. How children cope with a new family structure depends partly on age, gender and whether their mother or father has formed the new family (Shaffer 1999:583). Girls can feel stepfathers are threatening their relationship with their mother and feel neglected (Hetherington cited in Shaffer 1999:583) (Vucinich et al cited in Shaffer 1999:583). Children of Averil's age upwards have more difficulty adjusting to a new family structure than younger children (Shaffer 1999:583).
Baumrind's parenting styles may explain Averil's mother and stepfather's approach. These styles are permissive, authoritarian and authoritative. Within them she explored four characteristics, 'warmth or nurturance, maturity demands, the clarity and consistency of rules and communication between parent and child'. 'The permissive parenting style is high in nurturance and low in maturity demands, control and communication, the authoritarian style is high in control and maturity demands, but low in nurturance and communication and the authoritative style is high in all four' (Baumrind cited in Bee1997:373). An authoritative parenting style appears most positive for children. Parents set limits, but are supportive and responsive to a child's needs (Baumrind cited in Bee 1997:374). It appears Averil is adjusting to her mother's divorce and remarriage. Her stepfather and her mother seem to have adopted an authoritative approach. They give her time, usually explain their decisions and give support. Their authoritative style may be helping reduce any disturbed behaviours Averil might develop and helping her psychologically adjust, despite her new family structure (Bee 1999:320).
The new family structure means the family now live in a crowded house and cannot afford to move. This, the fact that Averil's mother cannot afford to buy her a new dress, and her mother and stepfather's manual unskilled jobs, could mean that the family are lower working class. This is characterised by work in unskilled or semi-skilled jobs, for which little training is needed. Most of the jobs are lower paid and less secure than skilled occupations' (Giddens 1997:254). Generally, educational achievement rises with family income so Averil could be viewed as disadvantaged in this respect, with education cost, poorer housing conditions and cultural factors all contributing, but she is currently working hard at school and doing well. Some sociologists have sited parental interest as a factor, with middle class parents, in some cases showing more interest in their children's education than working class parents (Taylor et al 1998:294-295). Perhaps this does not apply to Averil's mother and stepfather due to the authoritative parenting style they have that was mentioned earlier, although there are two small indications that they are not showing full interest. Averil's mother tells her she can take her project to show her granny another day and her stepfather won't help her cook the healthy meal.
Perhaps Averil's strong learning motivation within her life stage is overriding cultural factors that might educationally disadvantage her. Social Learning Theory, (SLT) could explain elements of her learning process. This emphasises human's cognitive abilities, which allow them to process environmental information, assisting their learning and development. Acknowledgement is made of children's improved cognitive learning capacities as they get older, but SLT would reject the idea that Averil's learning reflects her life stage of middle childhood and insist she will learn things based on people around her and her experiences. The theory emphasises that humans consider what the future outcome of their actions will be, being affected more by what their expectations are, than by consequences they have experienced. Averil believes if she works on her healthy eating project now, the reward of becoming a chef will come later. She may get small rewards and punishments on her way, such as praise from her teacher and less time with friends, but she is considering long-term rewards. SLT also emphasises observational learning, (modelling), which is learning from watching others (termed models). Averil could be modelling, for example people say she looks like her mum. This could mean in looks, but could also mean she is observing and learning from her mother. Also she wants to be as good as her stepsister Julie on the beam so she is practising hard (Bandura cited in Sigelman and Rider 2003:36-37).
Whilst SLT does not support a life stage approach to children's learning it does highlight how maturing and gaining experience in middle childhood, allows children to understand themselves more and become more reflective, competent and articulate (Bandura cited in Berger 2005:314). Averil can tell her family her feelings, for example she disagrees with her stepfather about not cooking the healthy meal at home. It is apparent then that SLT has implications for children's learning and sense of self and personality.
Moving on to examine personality, Erikson proposed psychosocial stages of identity development, identifying a particular social task at each stage. Averil is in the industry versus inferiority stage. School is a major influence with the child being expected to show competence in educational tasks. If they cannot, a sense of inferiority results. As in all his stages, Erikson emphasised balance. The child needs enough success to feel competent, but there should not be too much emphasis on this or the child may become a 'workaholic'. Averil has come through the trust versus mistrust, autonomy versus shame and doubt and initiative versus guilt stages. It appears she has developed a sense of trust in the world around her, a sense of autonomy and independence and a sense of initiative. Within her current stage she is developing skills and feeling confident in her abilities. Although she isn't as good as Julie on the beam, she is not feeling discouraged and is striving to improve. In school, she is feeling more competent, is proud of her project, and wants to show it to her granny (Bee 1997:267-270).
Examining Averil's cognitive development, Piaget would have placed her in the concrete operational stage, one of his four cognitive development stages. Concrete operational thought includes logical principles that children begin understanding and applying in concrete situations whilst thinking more systematically, objectively and scientifically (Berger 2005: 289). The first of the principles Averil appears to grasp is reversibility, meaning she uses imagination to perform a reversible mental action on real objects (Santrock 1998: 223). She knows if she practises on the beam she will get better, and if she doesn't she will get worse. The second principle she understands is classification, which involves classifying things into groups and thinking about their relationships (Santrock 2005:224). Averil classifies healthy food within the category of food in general. Concrete operational children also lose the egocentric thinking of younger children, developing understanding that others may feel differently to them, for example Averil accepts she must share her room with her stepsisters as her mum and stepfather cannot afford a bigger house (Sigelman and Rider 2003:174).
However Piaget's theory does not explain how Averil's social interactions influence her cognitive development. Her teacher has enthused her regarding the school healthy eating project and she wants help from her stepfather with cooking a meal. Her stepsister Julie and her mother are also big influences. The main theme of Vygostky's sociocultural theory is that 'cognitive growth occurs in a sociocultural context and evolves out of the child's social interactions'. Culture and social experiences influence how and what we think. For example, perhaps Averil has always had negative feelings about smoking, passed on from significant people in her life, and her favourite meals may be fast food because that is what she has always been given by adults and all her peers eat it. Both Vygosky and Piaget's theories have application to Averil's cognitive development as she is developing specific cognitive abilities relevant to her life stage, whilst being influenced by her social and cultural environment (Sigelman and Rider 2003:184-188).
Peer support is important in Averil's life stage. As children are less egocentric they care more about what friends think, and need them as equals. Close friends are extremely important (Berger 317-318). Shared interests are the main reason for middle childhood friendships, with children defining their friendships based on common activities, not common values. This fits closely with concrete operational thinking. Averil has made friends at her gym who share her interest.
In this essay, there has been an exploration of eight-year old Averil's occupational performance, life stage, environment and some theories that might explain aspects of these. Averil appears to be in a generally supportive family and this has helped her survive the traumas of her parent's divorce and her new family situation. In this life stage, school, social interaction and peers are important. Averil wants to learn from others, including her mother and stepsister and wants to develop the bond with her new stepfather. She is thinking more logically and developing a sense of self. No one theory alone can explain Averil's life, but there are aspects of many, which apply.