This essay will begin with a brief introduction to occupational science. Occupational risk factors will then be introduced and two of these, occupational imbalance and occupational deprivation will be explored, using literature examples and the author's experience. Next, health and wellbeing will be defined and the importance of occupation and the term 'occupational being' will be considered. Finally the author will discuss how occupational imbalance and occupational deprivation relate to her as an 'occupational being' and might affect her health and wellbeing.
Occupational science was founded in the late 1980s to 1990's, came from early twentieth century occupational therapy values, and can be used to inform occupational therapy. Occupational science and occupational therapy focus on occupation, but occupational therapy is a profession and occupational science is an academic discipline. Occupational science examines human behaviour incorporating some sociology, psychology and anthropology. It aims to advance understanding of how occupation influences health and wellbeing, and its research offers supporting evidence to individual therapy interventions (Larson, Wood and Clark 2003:15-24). Within occupational science it is proposed that occupational institutions and activities can affect individuals through occupational risk factors leading to boredom, burnout, mental illness, increased blood pressure, decreased fitness, brain or liver function, changes in sleep patterns, body weight and emotional state, possibly ultimately leading to disease, disability or death (Wilcock 1998:137).
Occupational imbalance is one occupational risk factor. Hagedorn defined it as 'a lack of variety in occupation; an undue focus on one occupation to the exclusion of others' (2001:166). Backman noted that occupational therapists have defined occupational balance as a 'necessary or satisfactory balance across the performance areas of self-care, productivity and leisure' (2004:202), occupational imbalance being the opposite. Wilcock's definition expands, 'occupational imbalance involves a state that occurs because people's engagement in occupation fails to meet their unique physical, social, mental, or rest needs and allows insufficient time for their own occupational interests and growth as well as for the occupations each feels obliged to undertake in order to meet family, social and community commitments' This definition shows defining occupational imbalance is difficult because everyone needs a different balance due to different interests, responsibilities and capacities (1998:138-139).
The author experienced occupational imbalance in previous employment, working longer hours than paid for, partly because she considered the employment to be paid work and leisure. This shows an occupational balance definition is difficult to apply universally because different people view the classification of their occupations differently (Backman 2004:203). The author was however expected to work weekends, which eventually caused resentment and stress when juggling work, leisure, domestic work and family time.
Recently, upon entering university, her occupational pattern changed. She must live on a lower income and gave up her car, and both these actions have made her social life quieter. She combines travelling to university, with attending classes, some paid work and private study. She sleeps less through rising earlier in the mornings and she goes to bed too late, so she gets tired. This highlights the essential balance between activity and rest. Artificial time constructs such as the eight hour day, or the five day working week may have little congruity with biologically based temporal rhythms, causing ill health. These constructs are used for social, economic or political reasons (Wilcock 1998:142). The author's new life requires organisation in planning the balance of her occupations.
Townsend and Wilcock state that underemployed individuals may not have enough mental, physical and social stimulation for a meaningful life, whilst over-employed individuals are too busy for self-care of themselves or their families. The occupational imbalance the author has experienced is over-employment. Unemployed people may have no paid employment and little opportunity to enjoy other meaningful, empowering occupations but they could also be over-occupied with survival through several paid and unpaid occupations. In all cases ill health can result (2004:82). Post-industrial cultures value paid employment, meaning there are few opportunities for individuals to use their capacities in a balanced way that benefits health. Paid employment can fail to provide balanced physical, mental and social stimulation. This means many must find other occupations so their capacities can be exercised to achieve health and wellbeing (Wilcock 1998:139).
Wilcock defined occupational deprivation as characterised by 'the influence of an external circumstance that keeps a person from acquiring, using or enjoying something' (1998:145). Whiteford said it was 'a state of preclusion from engagement in occupations of necessity and/or meaning due to factors that stand outside the control of the individual'. These definitions highlight that it is an external agent that is doing the depriving and the person has no control (2000:200-201). The external factor could be technology, few employment opportunities, poverty or affluence, the division of labour, social and cultural exclusions or ill health and disability (Wilcock 1998:145).
The author experienced occupational deprivation through unsatisfactory employment conditions (Whiteford 2004:226). Her occupational imbalance arising from previously working long hours or from her current competing study, work and travel demands is also a form of occupational deprivation. She was and is unable to engage in leisure and social activity as much as she wished/wishes. Also when she left college several years ago she volunteered full-time for eighteen months to gain experience for paid environmental work because the field was competitive and gaining a qualification alone was insufficient. Although initially she did not feel occupationally deprived, when nearing the end of the volunteering, she felt pressured by society's expectations that she should gain paid work which led to a sense of occupational deprivation. In western societies, an individual's paid occupation often influences social acceptance and status and if they are deprived of employment it can affect confidence and self-esteem. In over employment, employees are expected to work more hours in competitive work environments. They could have an occupational imbalance in work and leisure occupations and a form of occupational deprivation resulting from one occupation dominating their time, causing stress (Whiteford 2004:226-229).
The author lived in geographical isolation in rural Herefordshire for several months whilst volunteering. She had a low income, no transport and shared a house with one other person. It was difficult volunteering and living with this person all the time, without many other social interactions. Whiteford cited geographical isolation as another example of occupational deprivation stating that it provides few opportunities to engage in meaningful occupations with others and reduces social interaction. There is minimal feedback for individuals on how others perceive them, which can adversely affect self-esteem and health (2004:224-225). The author did not reach this point, but may have with longer isolation.
Other groups experiencing occupational deprivation include women, refugees, prisoners, people with disabilities, those in poverty, minority ethnic groups, and elderly people (Wilcock 1998:147, Whiteford 2004:223-239).
Women have historically been unable to undertake many occupations available to men. This inequality of opportunity due to the type of economy and dominant cultural ideas is still evident today (Whiteford 2004:232-233, Wilcock 1998:148). Refugees can experience occupational deprivation, being unable to participate in meaningful occupations that characterised and structured life in their home country. When they are resettled in a host country, cultural, economic and social isolation can result through language barriers and possible indifference or hostility from individuals or organisations (Whiteford 2004:233-235). Incarceration involves deliberately removing the right to participate in occupations. This kind of occupational deprivation will vary amongst inmates and can be destructive when restrictions are too strong. Effects include boredom, mental illness, suicide and rioting and it can be detrimental to community reintegration (Whiteford 2004:230-231). People with a physical or mental disability experience conditions within the individual that are barriers to participation in occupations, because an external agent is doing the depriving. This can be the stereotyped perceptions and prejudiced attitudes of others. Also the physical environment can inhibit occupational engagement for people with physical disabilities (Whiteford 2004:236).
Before examining how occupational imbalance and occupational deprivation relate to the author as an 'occupational being' and might influence her health and wellbeing, a definition of health, and one of wellbeing follows. Health has been defined as, 'a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity' (UNO cited in Creek 2002:193). Turner, Foster and Johnson define wellbeing as 'a sense of physical and mental comfort' (2002:639). These definitions show that health and wellbeing are closely interlinked. Examining occupation and the term 'occupational being', a simple definition of occupational science is 'the study of humans as 'occupational beings' suggesting that undertaking occupations is an innate human behaviour. Occupation, (doing) and humanness, (being) are inextricably linked and occupation is concerned with evolutionary, biological, social and economic functions (Kraemer, Hinojosa and Brasic Royeen 2003:158).
The author's status as an 'occupational being' incorporates her values and lifestyle, and the importance she places on her occupations. She uses her social and leisure occupations to forget work and keep in touch with family and friends. These occupations include walking, enjoying the outdoors, tennis, making mosaics and going out with friends. She feels her work should not extend into her leisure time. To enjoy these occupations, she needs to plan ahead, so for example, she can go out walking at least one a month, or play tennis once a fortnight. This temporal aspect of her leisure occupations and those of her work and self-care occupations gives her life purpose and structure. Also she values the time she can spend alone to relax and 'switch off', which is spent enjoying television or reading.
She needs to enjoy her work and for it to make a difference to others. Also she wishes it not to feel too much like work. These values drove her to return to university to study occupational therapy. Now she enjoys learning new things and experiencing a period in a different atmosphere from the full-time employment world. She needs to make time for private study and for some paid work to pay the bills. She likes to have time for cooking and eating healthy food, looking after herself and domestic work. Most of these occupations give her a sense of intrinsic and extrinsic wellbeing. 'Occupation could relate to a role title..., or may organise a sphere of activity that reflects the person's self-identity but which brings no particular role with the title, such as the image of oneself as an independent person. Thus a person's occupations are reflected in the content and manner of the activities he performs'. So in a day when the author undertakes self-care, travel to university and going for an evening walk with friends, all these activities will reflect her self image as, for example, an independent person, a student and someone who gains from others and gives to them through, social interaction (Turner 2002:21-22).
Relating these occupations and values and the author as an 'occupational being' to occupational imbalance and occupational deprivation and considering the possible influence on her health and wellbeing, it can be seen that she needs to make time for her leisure activities which she views as intrinsic to her being. She also has demands to fulfil to advance in her study and have enough money to live on. If she could not pursue these activities the effect on her health could be detrimental. She could become stressed and if the occupational imbalance or deprivation became acute, it could affect her mental health. Not engaging in occupations such as tennis and walking could cause declining physical health, weight gain and associated problems. If the occupational imbalance and occupational deprivation involved working long hours in an occupation with no meaning to her, then the adverse effect on her mental health could be even greater. She would also become stressed if she was unable to control self-care and domestic occupations. Wellbeing can be considered to be wider than the definition above, so if we believe it is also about an emotional state, striving for balance, taking responsibility and engaging with others, the occupational imbalance and deprivation mentioned could also lower the author's self-esteem and confidence. This would be due to a lack of social contact, a lack of feedback and a possible sense of losing control.
This essay has explored two occupational risk factors, occupational imbalance and occupational deprivation. Occupational imbalance concerns the lack of balance between occupations that an individual must carry out and those they choose. Both are needed for an individual's personal growth, health and wellbeing. Imbalance can vary within each individual as each has different requirements and classifies their occupations in their unique way. Western societies value paid employment, which can fail to provide balanced physical, mental and social stimulation, so an occupational balance is essential to assist in health and wellbeing. Occupational deprivation and occupational imbalance are closely related phenomena and the former precludes individuals from engaging in necessary or meaningful occupations, and is influenced by something external to the individual, such as the societal, cultural and economic values of today. Occupational science views humans as 'occupational beings', suggesting that undertaking occupations is part of being human. Finally this essay has explored the author's occupations and their importance to her as an 'occupational being' and examined the possible effects on her health and wellbeing if these occupations became imbalanced for her, or she was deprived of any of them.