This essay will briefly outline the occupational therapy, (OT) process and the role of assessment. Then it will focus on how assessment is underpinned by theory, when using a theory driven approach. Finally client-centred practice, an OT core value will be examined and there will be an exploration of how it can impact upon and influence the assessment process.
Turner, Foster and Johnson defined the OT process as 'a series of ordered thoughts and actions undertaken in order to successfully complete OT intervention' (2002:639). The three main stages are assessment, intervention and evaluation (Creek 2002:79). Duncan defines assessment as 'the gathering of relevant information that informs the prioritisation and development of clinical goals for intervention' (2006:50). An initial assessment identifies the client's strengths and problems, establishes whether OT intervention is appropriate and gathers information prior to planning a programme of action. Assessment then continues throughout the OT process highlighting changes and attainment of goals resulting from intervention. Later assessments determine the client's remaining needs to enable discharge recommendations and follow up planning (Creek 2002:93).
How assessment is conducted depends upon whether a theory or process driven approach is used. If an approach is selected before assessment, the OT process is theory driven and if selected after assessment, the process is process driven, with assessment results determining the most suitable approach (Hagedorn 2001:55). Creek described theory as 'a system of assumptions and principles devised to analyse, predict or explain phenomena' (2003:35). Within OT, theory includes the philosophy of the profession, paradigms, frames of reference, (FOR), models and approaches, (Foster 2002:47). Theory use within assessment and the whole OT process provides a coherent, consistent basis for practice and eases decision making (Hagedorn 2001:56). Decisions to use certain theories should be evidence based and theory driven practice will develop the therapist's expertise and clinical reasoning (Duncan 2006:332-333).
In a theory driven process one or more FOR can be used with the chosen model (Duncan 2006:65). Approaches fitting in with the FOR and model will be used to practically apply the model or FOR. 'A FOR is a body of knowledge which draws together facts and theories concerning some aspect of physical function or behaviour'. Primary frames of reference, (PFOR) use theory external to OT and applied frames of reference, (AFOR) are developed by occupational therapists using material from within and outside the profession. A model draws together theories and knowledge from compatible, varied sources in order to integrate them and describe or explain complex concepts. It may offer a simplified explanation or structure to illustrate the relationships between ideas or between theory and practice (Hagedorn 2001:159).
For example, the biomechanical AFOR can be used in physical rehabilitation settings. Its approaches include, using activities for specific effects, biomechanical principles to improve activities of daily living, or aids and adaptations. Using this AFOR and approaches means clients are expected to show measurable improvements in physical movements or performance skills, so quantifiable, specific standardised physical function assessments are often used (Hagedorn 2001:72-74). If this AFOR and approaches are used alone, they 'contradict the holism and humanism of OT's philosophy' with no emphasis on psychological, emotional, social and environmental aspects of occupational performance (Foster 2002:73-74). Using a model such as the Model of Human Occupation, (MOHO), devised by Keilhofner, Burke and Lgi in the late 1970's and early 1980's, would address this. It can encompass all these aspects and has many assessment tools such as interview schedules, self administered checklists and tests and several functional assessments. These focus on areas such as occupational performance history, interests, motivation and occupational roles (Foster 2002:62-63).
Using an OT model helps the therapist and client to address the client's occupational performance issues holistically, providing assessment tools to help do this. In the example above, the knowledge in the biomechanical AFOR needed to be filtered through the Occupation Paradigm, (meaning that occupational therapists must view clients as occupational beings). The model, MOHO, can help do this, meaning a biomechanical AFOR used by occupational therapists will be different from a biomechanical AFOR used by other healthcare professionals (McMillan 2006:257). This also applies with the use of other AFORs and models.
There are five OT core values: occupation is fundamental to health and wellbeing (Turner 2002:21-22), client-centred practice (Law 1998), holism (Hagedorn 2001:158), enablement and empowerment. There will now be an examination of client-centred practice and its impact and influence upon assessment.
A study by Sumsion devised a United Kingdom definition of client-centred practice, it was defined as 'a partnership between the client and the therapist that empowers the client to engage in functional performance and fulfil his or her occupational roles in a variety of environments. The client participates actively in negotiating goals which are given priority and are at the centre of assessment, intervention and evaluation. Throughout the process the therapist listens to and respects the client's values, adapts the interventions to meet the client's needs and enables the client to make informed decisions' (2000:308).
This definition shows client-centred practice significantly influences the assessment process with the client's needs, values and goals centrally placed. Therapists using client-centred practice must inform clients that they value their views, want to understand their life, are committed to helping, have resources to support and can be trusted to do what the client wants (Pollock and McColl 1998:90). During assessment the therapeutic relationship begins to be established. In a client-centred approach this relationship should assure the client that the therapist will not take over assessment and the OT process, will not assume sole responsibility for therapy success and will not impose their will upon the client. Instead the therapist will support the client to make their own changes, by providing information and resources and assuring the client of their belief in their ability to achieve desired changes (Pollock and McColl 1998:93-94).
In client-centred OT the client's perspective is the most important; therefore most assessment needs to be self-report. Open-ended methods make discovering the client's experiences and needs easier, and help gather more useful, accurate information than more structured methods (Pollock and McColl 1998:93). Many clients will not know what occupational therapists do so the therapist must explain their role in an accessible manner (Pollock and McColl 1998:96), and outline the client-centred approach as it might be unfamiliar to someone who has experienced traditional medical relationships (Parker 2006:207).
In client-centred practice, narrative methods may be a useful assessment technique. The therapist and client collaborate in telling the client's story and interpreting the meaning. An example might be a therapist and client working together to compile a story about a client leaving hospital and entering their home with altered physical capacity following a stroke, to prepare the client for going home (Pollock and McColl 1998:96-98).
Another assessment method is semi-structured interviews (Pollock and McColl 1998:98). One of the foremost of these for use in a client-centred approach is the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure, (COPM), part of the Canadian Model of Occupational Performance. It is an individualised measure which allows clients to express their occupational performance priorities. It can be used to determine whether OT is appropriate for the client, to help client and therapist explore the client's occupational performance problems and set therapy goals in the initial assessment, and later as an outcome measure to determine occupational performance changes resulting from intervention (Pollock, McColl and Carswell 1999:105). There are also other individualised measures, resulting from the move towards client-centred practice (Pollock and McColl 1998:99).
The client-centred approach can impact positively and possibly negatively on assessment. It recognises the client as the 'expert' on his or her unique problem, encourages autonomy and enables the client to be fully involved in making therapy decisions (Swee Hong, Pearce and Withers 2000:316). Using the approach means that because clients identify their own needs, OT interventions can be truly individual. The therapist can develop by learning from the client, as the therapist is no longer considered the 'expert' (Pollock and McColl 1998:94). Client-centred practice could also possibly impact negatively on the assessment process. There can sometimes be client safety issues. For example, an elderly client may wish to return to living independently and this may conflict with the therapist's view of whether this is safe if the client is susceptible to falls. In these kinds of cases the therapist should document exchanges with the client on the issue and then give them the power to choose. Also the initial assessment and goal setting process can be long, as time must be spent helping the client to understand their problems and working together to devise an intervention plan owned by them. However, the remainder of the OT process, including subsequent assessments, should be shorter as the client is more able to identify concerns and take responsibility for goals. The client-centred approach can place greater demands on the client, so the therapist should prioritise targetting assessment and intervention at the right level, facilitating the resolution of client's problems, not adding to them (Sumsion 1999:32-35). Lastly the client could set what the therapist feels are inappropriate goals and there may be conflicts between the balances of giving the client autonomy and doing what is right for them. This means therapists should check goals with clients and foster enabling client-centred attitudes (Sumsion and Smyth 2000:18).
This essay has explored the OT process and the role of assessment. If the process, including assessment, is theory driven, it can be shaped by theory internal and external to OT. Models and their assessment tools can add the unique OT holistic and occupational perspective to assessment and the OT process as a whole, working alongside FORs and including approaches. Client-centred practice, an OT core value, has been defined and its influence on assessment examined. In this approach therapists empower clients to convey their occupational performance priorities and to own goals. There are many positive influences on assessment and some perceived negative ones which can be overcome by the methods outlined above.