The primary route of transmission of hospital-acquired infection is the hands of health professionals; however compliance with hand decontamination is low. This study proposes to examine midwives' experience of hand hygiene and their attitudes towards and compliance with clinical guidelines. The design is a qualitative study using semi-structured interviews and the methodology is phenomenology. The research will take place in the postnatal ward of the local Women's Centre. The target population are midwives working on the postnatal ward. The sampling method proposed is purposive sampling and the intended sample size is 15. The data will be collected via semi-structured interviews, which will be transcribed. The data analysis method to be used is Colaizzi's (1978) phenomenological interpretation. Informed consent will be obtained from respondents and anonymity and confidentiality will be maintained at all times.
Hospital acquired infection is one of the primary causes of morbidity and mortality in patients (Kerr 1998). Hence, controlling the spread of infection is critically important in healthcare settings. This fact has been highlighted in recent years by epidemics of drug resistant organism such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (Xavier 1999). England now has the highest proportion of MRSA bloodstream infections in Europe (Gould 2004), with roughly one in ten patients developing a hospital-acquired infection during their stay (Xavier 1999). 'In terms of promoting positive health, handwashing is the single most important clinical procedure: hands are the principle route by which cross-infection occurs' (Elliott 1996 cited in Johnson & Taylor 2000 p.69). Kerr (1998) argues that there is no room for complacency regarding health professionals' compliance with infection control measures. However compliance with hand decontamination is as low as 50% among health professionals (Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust 2003). This study proposes to explore midwives' experience of hand hygiene practice in their clinical settings and their attitudes towards and compliance with hand hygiene policies and guidelines.
The people who will benefit from this research are firstly the midwives who take part because it will hopefully give them a greater understanding of their hand hygiene practice. Secondly the whole postnatal ward should benefit from this research because it should help managers to understand how to better approach the issue of hand hygiene in practice. Thirdly, if this research is published then the findings could be used to improve the understanding of hand hygiene behaviour in similar settings. Limitations to this study are that the generalisability is limited because it will only take place at one location and has a relatively small sample size. However, 'What the reader may ask is, can the research findings be transferred to another group with similar characteristics and in a similar setting?' (Bluff 1997 p.234).
The aim of the proposed research is to determine midwives' experience of hand hygiene and midwives' feelings about following hand hygiene guidelines in the clinical setting of the postnatal ward, Women's Centre. Specifically it will seek to answer the following questions:
Do the midwives comply with hand hygiene policies and guidelines?
Why do some midwives not follow guidelines?
What barriers do midwives have to compliance with the guidelines?
What are the midwives' attitudes towards hand hygiene guidance?
What factors influence their hand hygiene practice?
Are there side effects to the long-term use of hand rubs or soaps?