This purpose of this report is to investigate the technology used in the building that could be incorporated into our studio work. The studio work will lead to a cramming project - a project which focuses on jamming more buildings into an already occupied and currently used site, allowing the site to reach its maximum economic potential. We have been given a choice of three sites in Oxford. My chosen site is St. Catherine's College - part of Oxford University. The idea behind this project is to question beauty against the usefulness of a site.
St. Catherine's College in Oxford was designed by the Danish architect Arne Jacobsen. The college is situated on the east side of Oxford, on the bank of the River Cherwell. The college is a contrast in design to most the other colleges, in that it was built hundreds of years later. It was built between 1962 and 1964. The buildings have of a modern design which is based on the older traditional quadrangle layout of the other colleges. Jacobsen's design of St. Catherine's ranged from the buildings to the furniture and cutlery used inside. Arne Jacobsen took his own approach to the quadrangle based college. Although designed in a different manner, it consists of the main elements - a central quad with lawn, with two rows of student's rooms either side, a garden, chapel and a dining hall. A main feature of the design is a large lily pond. Due to this unique design, the architecture of the college creates a feeling of space, light and peace (St. Catherine's Website, 2006).
The college buildings are constructed primarily from glass and concrete. The techniques used with these materials will be established for my report. St. Catherine's has a large foot print, and rises up three floors. Most of the building is residential, providing accommodation for the students. Each student has their own room, providing somewhere for them to sleep and study. The college currently houses about 700 students.
Studying the technology, the construction methods, the structures, and environmental issues on this building, will have an effect on the designs of my future studio work. I hope to have a better awareness of the technologies and concepts of design used in St. Catherine's and the methods used in the original architectural design by Arne Jacobsen. I believe this should help me to incorporate his architectural forms and concepts into new designs. I will need to consider every aspect of the buildings design from the foundations to the roof.
Some of the original construction methods may not be used today and so I will need to look into alternatives used presently. Development in technologies since the building was built will alter the type of materials used and these will need to be researched.
Structure is the consideration of loads, stresses, and strains, bending moments, elastic and plastic ranges of the materials involved in order that a safe structure may be constructed. These should all be taken into account.
The environmental side will look at the existing site, identifying the type of terrain, site access, the positioning of existing buildings on the site and the materials.
The information found on this building will be recorded in writing, tables, illustrations and photographs of relevant material. Diagrams will be used to demonstrate the construction and structural methods used in the building.
The following environmental issues related to St. Catherine's College, Oxford, will be considered:
Materials used - investigating materials used in the building, concrete and glass being the main elements. Environmental advantages and disadvantages of these materials will be studied, whether they have recyclable or re-usable properties. Materials have developed since the 1960s and there is more sustainable material available to use in future developments. The use of low embodied energy materials or recycled materials is important in the design and construction. - I shall include tables of materials.
Thermal comfort - the building provides housing for students in the college. The building should meet thermal comfort levels for the accommodation, but at the same time I shall look at areas in which energy can be conserved, such as effective insulation and ventilation. U-valves of the building would also be useful to work out (Baden-Powell, 2001a).
The geological position of the buildings will have an effect on the light and prevailing winds on the college. The position can alter the amount of solar gain the buildings obtain (Allen, Iano, 2002a), meaning increased usage of natural resources and a saving on artificial lighting and heat (Baden-Powell, 2001b). - I shall include illustrations and diagrams of building orientation.
Types of buildings - Student accommodation, and Scandinavian buildings.
Other buildings to look at:
The types of construction techniques used in the original buildings will be explored. Glass and concrete are the main two resources used in this scheme.
The following areas will need to be investigated at in future detail:
Foundations
Within the blocks of St. Catherine's, the large structures should be able to withstand many different loads and forces exerted on it. There will be several different forces and loads acting on the building at once (Gauld, 1995). The main loads to consider are primary loads such as: