This extract from "An Encounter" in Dubliners may be characteristic of the modernist period. The reader expects a light-hearted adventure story when reading the first paragraph, but what we get is something far more shocking and unexpected. Can such a diverse period, therefore, be described in such limited terms? Joyce is telling us not to be fooled by appearances. The man we encounter is clearly a paedophile, allowing Joyce to touch upon a taboo subject. We sense Joyce's desire to explore this matter but is restrained by what he can and cannot write. Can it be said therefore, with any certainty, that the modernist writers of the period lost faith in narrative?
Many argued that the bleak realism which was depicted in both The Good Soldier and Dubliners, conveyed failure and confusion. Sara Haslam states, that "the modernists who followed after World War I were noticeable for their pessimism and their sense of a failed, fragmented society." However, rather than losing faith in narrative, the modernist writers, such as Joyce and Ford simply changed their approach to narrative. Choosing to heighten a sense of mood in no way disregards narrative, but succeeds in expanding it.
Abstract content, fragmented style and confused narrative technique are all features of modernist writing. In The Good Soldier, Ford offers us his story in a form of a montage. The narrator, John Dowell is constantly throwing the story backwards and forwards through time, creating incoherence and uncertainty. In Dubliners, Joyce presents us with a collection of short stories. The frustrating shortness and lack of closure in the stories, with its grubby portrayal of everyday life has earned the book a modernist reputation. These innovative techniques were a reaction against "traditional" Victorian forms of writing, which were generally seen as a source of escapism and moral awareness.
This created a shift in attitudes in the way art was viewed and conventional narrative structure was rejected. Utilising art and allowing it to make changes in society and politics became a new system of thought. With these views came the formulation of certain aesthetic principles, usually associated with the Imagistes. By adopting an "art for art's sake" attitude, many modernist texts offer realistic fragments of atmosphere.
Joyce does indeed capture a sense of mood here, but rather than disregarding narrative, he is using art and aesthetics as a medium to develop the story. In the quote, Eveline seems to be alone, possibly isolated. We sense her melancholy. The use of the term "invade" gives us a sense of violation. The man she watches "clacks" and "crunches" on the pavement, suggesting aggressiveness. Eveline is a young woman and one could come to the conclusion that this story is perhaps about a young girl's sexual awakening. The use of the colour red may signify sex or passion. Perhaps the aggressive undertones suggest rape? Joyce, therefore is utilising art as a means to create uncertainty and stir the reader's thoughts which in turn increases the sophistication of the narrative.
Ford and Joyce shared an interest in the survival of the aesthetics. Like many Imagist poetry, literary impressionism features in The Good Soldier. However, while the Imagistes were interested in capturing a moment and had no interest in narrative, Ford uses narrative to mediate between his style and technique.
Traditional forms of writing tend to give a fictionalised view of life which therefore, does not depict reality. But changing attitudes to this type of writing meant writers adopted more innovative techniques to develop and expand their work. Ford uses artistic impressionism in his novel.
Dowell offers us a vivid image of Leonora. The image is classical, almost statuesque. Dowell presents us with his negative opinion; followed by a contradictory "I don't know." This creates confusion as Dowell seems uncertain about what he thinks of the image he has presented to us. The instability here increases depth and variety to Ford's narrative.
Joyce's deliberate use of stream of consciousness in Dubliners, allows him to build on the quality and sophistication of the narrative. In "The Dead," Lily, the caretaker's daughter is described as being "literally run off her feet." The obvious mistake here is that one cannot be literally run off their feet. This is Lily's mistake however, not Joyce's. His use of Free Indirect style allows him to partly access her thoughts, but he is also distanced enough to be ironic. Joyce's use of artistic flair offers the reader an authentic literary reading.
Traditional novels offered an omniscient narrator; one that the reader could rely and depend upon to give us a truthful account of the story. Ford presents us with an unreliable narrator. We are constantly questioning the truth of what Dowell tells us. Although his unstable narration means that he loses control of the narrative, this does not mean that narrative does not feature dominantly in the novel. By constantly flipping backwards and forwards in time, we get a sense of incoherence and uncertainty that allows us to glimpse the world in which Dowell is living. Hood states that ". . . the narrative development has depended upon the tension between the flux of past and present moments." History and past influences are important in determining the quality of modern writing. Talking about Ford, Haslam states that, "he will write from his memory, from his search for his past, from his attempt to come to understand the gaps between his past and present self." Can this be applied to not only Ford, but Dowell? Dowell is constantly affected by past events, which is why he switches between past and present tense.
This features at the beginning of the story, instantly creating uncertainty in the reader. Is this intended? Haslam believes that this is Ford depicting a realistic account of the uncertainties in life.
(Ford writes) . .
Indeed, Ford was writing at a time of unrest, during war and in a world of internal conflict. Perhaps he was trying to convey that life and the world is unstable and impressionistic. However, many would argue that this is in fact Dowell trying to confuse and perplex his readers. Why does he do this? He tells us of his desire to write, to get things off his chest.
Could Dowell be a reflective character of Ford? In this sense, the story is Ford's as opposed to Dowell's, even though Dowell is the narrator. For did he not begin the story with, "(t)his is the saddest story I have ever heard," instead of "this is the saddest story I have ever told."?
This uncertainty about who the true narrator here puzzles the reader. Although this narrative technique would have been seen as radical for the period, we question whether art and language can ever be wholly new or different. It is as the Imagist poet T.E. Hulme theorised, there is "no geist without ghost." Nothing is ever really new. The modernist writer, Virginia Woolf states,
Everything in life and society is affected by history and past events and this is depicted in modern literature. Therefore, is The Good Soldier as innovative as we might like to think?
Although the structure and conventions of the narrative is certainly different to the conventional novel, it is far more stable than that of Imagist poetry. The Good Soldier does in fact bear a resemblance to the detective story. There is mystery, intrigue and we are constantly questioning the information we are given. It is essentially a quest for the truth. The novel enforces sensationalism, as it deals with adultery and sex. This reinforcement of some stability would surely appeal to those in search for narrative structure.
Are the modernist writers, in their feat to experiment with style and technique, challenging a different type of "interesting" story? If Eveline was indeed pursuing a sexual relationship, then Joyce is including sexual politics into his work and is pushing the boundaries of what is acceptable content for a novel of the period. Terence Brown, in his introduction to Dubliners describes the book as a collection of "plotless stories." True, the narrative ellipses does create confusion and the reader is often left wondering, "What is the point?" But the technique merely allows the reader to form their own opinions and conclusions.
Hodgart may be underestimating Joyce's work here. Joyce dominates his stories with the recurring theme of paralysis, trying to depict a realistic Dublin as he felt that society was restricted in terms of freedom of thought and expression.
As we have seen in "An Encounter," paralysis is depicted as sexual obsession that cannot be escaped from. Father Flynn suffers from physical paralysis in "The Sisters." Joyce's main aim was to convey realism in his stories by his use of naturalism and his determinacy to get details absolutely correct. When his stories were seen as shocking, he stated that, "it is not my fault that the odour of ashpits and old weeds and offal hangs around my stories." Again, this echoes the desire to makes changes in society. Rather than Dubliners being an uninteresting collection of stories, perhaps people were simply not ready for Joyce's naturalistic portrayal of the mundanities of everyday life. Joyce's portrayal of reality proved to be deeply shocking during the period. F.S.L. Lyon's review of Dubliners describes the depiction of the city as "drab, impoverished and servile." By refusing to convey Dublin in a fictional manner, the novel was deemed subversive, which would in fact enhance the interest of the stories.
In his quest to convey realism, Joyce portrays a corrupt priest in "The Sisters." Father Flynn is a well respected priest who, upon his death receives the formal ceremonies of which a man of his religious standing is accustomed too. However, we are drawn to the unusual relationship between Father Flynn and the unnamed boy, who is both attracted and repulsed by him.
Joyce is perhaps undermining society for being blinded by false appearances. Joyce is depicting realism and irony with his mix of religion and hypocrisy. In "Counterparts," Joyce expresses the expectations of society. Farrington, a copy clerk is unhappy in his job and situation and merely desires freedom and pleasure. As a result, Farrington finds himself in the midst of financial crisis. Upon coming home, he beats his son in frustration. Joyce is heavily satirizing religion as his son constantly repeats, "I'll say a hail Mary for you." Joyce is inviting us to question, will religion really help?
Paralysis prevents any real closure to the stories. Often, this lack of closure is seen as suggestive of the lack of events or action. In her essay on Dubliners, Marilyn French states that, ". . . some of the stories are oversimplified . . . Joyce's own values were not developed enough." On the contrary, it can be viewed that the lack of closure in fact builds up tension and frustration.
Was Joyce deliberately withholding his ideology to allow us to form our own conclusions, or was this a result of publishing restrictions? His stories were sent back several times for revision and editing.
Due to these restrictions about content, Joyce may not have necessarily "preferred" to create mood and atmosphere, but was simply limited to doing so to avoid publication refusal.
Ford was also limited to what he could explore in his novel. One review which featured in the Boston Transcript, blasted the novel's sensational content.
To avoid such reviews, Ford may have settled for a technique which would not have created such outrage. Again, this does not indicate that he "preferred" to limit his work to the creation of mood. In fact, when his work was described as enforcing literary impressionism, he declared, "I don't know; I just write books and if someone attaches the label of impressionism to me, I do not much mind."
There is much speculation about the characters in the text being "complex" at all. If the stories in Dubliners are indeed too short and casual, how could the characters be developed enough to be complex? For example, upon first impressions, the character of Eveline is assumed to be complicated. She yearns for freedom from oppression. She is confined to her sexuality and female role.
We think we have accessed her thoughts when she refuses to board the train. "Her eyes gave him no sign of love or farewell or recognition." However, upon closer inspection, we question whether Eveline is as complex as we would like to imagine. Eveline offers the impression of a meek girl, limiting her education to popular songs and stories, such as The Bohemian Girl, which is a light, romantic opera. She is also fairly nave.
It is possible that Frank was to take advantage of the young girl and have no intention of marrying her. A simple, nave girl in love is a popular stereotype, so we question how complicated she is. One could look to the character of Harriet Smith in Emma. Not only is she young and nave, but she is also limited to her knowledge about the world. Eveline therefore is made up of common clich's.
Although Dowell succeeds in perplexing his readers, we are left questioning the quality of his character. We are frustrated with his determinacy to believe that Captain Ashburnham is a "good" soldier. "For I can't conceal from myself the fact that I loved Edward Ashburnham." We are frustrated with Dowell's imperceptiveness. Is he just stupid? Can he really not distinguish between Edward's outward conduct and false morality? His story is also predominantly solipsistic which makes us wonder if this is because he has nothing else to offer us, but talk of himself.
However, when faced with such characters as Leonora, one would feel compelled to argue that she is in fact a complex character. She is dominant, perceptive and conceals her true feelings.
Ford may be expressing the paranoia of the New Woman, who was slowly rising due to the effects of war. These women were becoming more independent and dominant in society. There are parallels here with Mrs Mooney in "The Boarding House." Mrs Mooney is a career woman. She separates from her husband and gives him "neither money nor food . . . And took what remained of her money . . . And set up a boarding house." She prides herself on dealing with moral matters as one would a "cleaver deals with meat."
Gabriel in "The Dead," is also an interesting, complicated character. He is an intelligent, cultured man. However, he suffers from a sense of failure. When he learns that his wife Gretta was in love with Michael Furey, he slumps into a feeling of self pity.
Could this be a reflection on Joyce? Does Joyce project the image of himself onto Gabriel? The failure that Gabriel feels could be self-reflective of the failure Joyce may feel with his work. The complexity of the characters in Dubliners and The Good Soldier add to the quality and interest in the stories, rather than divert away from the narrative.
As Haslam states, "the realism and consistency are the sole virtues of the story." If this is the case and realism does in fact make modernist texts successful, then surely this makes the narrative interesting. As we have seen, portraying reality was a major theme in modernist writing. As Joyce and Ford have depicted, reality is only evident when using aesthetic principles to create mood and effect. Clearly, however, this in no way disregards narrative.