Philo in Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, is articulating the common objections to the Design argument, known also as Natural Theology. As an a posteriori argument, Natural Theology posits the idea that you can seek knowledge of God through observation of nature and the world. The fact that there is apparent order and purpose in the world suggests the need for a designer, rather than leaving it to chance. The universe is decidedly complex, so the simplest explanation is that there must have been a designer. And that designer is God.
Gurney's hymn states, "Yes, God is good, all nature says . . ." This echoes the main ideology behind the Design argument. William Paley defined the argument by positing his watchmaker theory.
The main push of Paley's theory suggests that if we were to stumble upon a complicated mechanism such as a watch, we would propose that there was a creator, for the watch cannot create itself or "just appear." Paley argued that even if parts of the watch were lost, or it if it did not work properly, we would still postulate a designer. Richard Swinburne furthered the argument, suggesting that the fantastic order and beauty in the world points to a designer God. "Order is a necessary condition of beauty . . . And the world is beautiful rather than ugly."
As already demonstrated, one of the common objections to this theory is that the world is not necessarily ordered and beautiful, as, by viewing the world, we can observe chaos and disorder.
Indeed, many aspects of the world produce chaos and suffering, such as earthquakes and hurricanes, suggesting that the worlds' order is not particularly perfect. But does this disprove God? Paley took great pains to reassure that disorder does not discredit a designer. "It is not necessary that a machine be perfect, in order to show with what design it was made."
Swinburne reinforced this idea, suggesting that people expect too much from God. He believed that God made a world where humans are free to learn and develop and in turn, choose to do either right or wrong. Pain and suffering is therefore crucial in order for humans to develop. "Why God should make the universe ugly would be to give creatures the opportunity . . . to make the world beautiful for themselves."
However, John Stuart Mill argued that even if God is testing humans, his attributes are compromised. Natural Theology can indeed point to a designer of the universe, but it certainly cannot point to a Christian God. God's common attributes are omnipotence and omni-benevolence, which cannot be possible in the face of extreme pain and suffering.
In short, if God were all-powerful, he would not be all-good and vice versa. However, one may ask why the designer God needs to be a Christian God? This argument only stands if Natural Theology aims to prove the existence of a God who embodies these traditional attributes.
Hume wonders why the world's designer needs to be "God." If that is all we can settle for, then why stop there? Perhaps there was more than one creator. Perhaps a novice God created the world.
This remains problematic for the Design argument as it articulates the philosophical leap that is also evident in the Ontological and Cosmological arguments. When trying to explain how the universe began, these arguments always seem to shift towards "God." As if this isn't enough to contend with, this God is usually a Christian God.
Considering issues such as pain and suffering, Hume questions what kind of God we are dealing with if we are to accept the Design argument. Has he not done a very good job? "Because of this ambiguity in the facts one cannot be justified in ascribing to God any infinite attributes of perfection."
The objections raised by Hume and Mill certainly pose problems for the Design argument to a certain extent, but they do not comment on the arguments' validation, but rather focus on what kind of God we end up with if we are to accept Natural Theology. The argument is only postulating the existence of God. It is not commenting on the nature of God. Who are we, anyway, to try to understand God's plan if he does indeed exist? As God said to Job, "where were you when I made the universe?" Perhaps we as humans will never have the capacity to know or understand God.
This idea stands as the basis of Immanuel Kant's challenge to the Design argument. He opposed the view that as humans, we can explain God by observing the material world. He maintained that the laws of cause and effect are limited to the physical world, as this is the only way we can think and reason. "According to Kant, we are unable to experience 'things in themselves.'" We have no justification to apply the same rules of cause and effect to the spiritual world. Therefore, it is implausible to move from the physical world to the metaphysical world. "The attainment of absolute totality is completely impossible on the path of empiricism."
However, many would argue that rejecting Natural Theology for this reason does not reject the concept of God. Kant's objection merely states that understanding God through use of the material world is impossible.
Adding to the debate is Darwin's theory of natural selection. The concept of evolution suggested a mechanism by which species adapt to their surroundings, allowing them to survive and develop by natural selection. Creatures can be formed from existing ones, without the need for an external designer.
"Those who had supported the Design argument had seen all the intricacies of nature as being the work of God." However, with Darwin's theory of natural selection and the survival of the fittest, it was possible to see how evolution can explain the complexities of the universe.
However, Darwin's theory does not take into account certain human attributes, such as altruism and duty. If the survival of the fittest allows to eliminate the weaker species, why do we as humans care for the handicapped or weak in society?
Swinburne and F.R. Tennant try to reconcile evolution with Natural Theology by theorising that evolution was "the mechanism that God uses to bring about his purposes," suggesting that evolution was part of God's design. God, according to Tennant created the world in such a way to allow intelligent life to evolve.
Swinburne accepts the theory that species reproduce through generations, but he questions the existence of the first species. As we know that the world has not been going on forever, something must have initially produced these species. For Swinburne, evolution points to God. "It is very probable that they were made by a rational agent - only clearly more powerful and knowledgeable than men."
In light of the various objections raised against Natural Theology, the theory of a designer God remains ambiguous. Can God's existence be proved? Kant demonstrated that it certainly cannot by observing the material world. "No one will be so bold as to profess that he comprehends the relation of the magnitude of the world as he has observed it to omnipotence." Perhaps we cannot understand God by using the facts of this world. But this does not disprove God. Perhaps the Design argument is "half way there."
The problem of evil and ugliness opposes the view that the world is apparently ordered and beautiful. If beauty is considered perfection, then the world, some may say, is opposite to beautiful. Therefore, whoever made the world is decidedly imperfect. And this, says Hume, is not what a believer wants God to be.
Despite his criticisms, however, Hume seems to accept the force of Natural Theology. Although he suggests that the argument is too idealistic, he disregards the point. Hume is concerned with God's character, which does not reject the existence of God, but rather highlights the implications of adopting the argument.
It seems that Natural Theology has triumphed. But the argument is flawed. It postulates that there once was a designer, but there is no proof that the designer still exists. The argument makes no assumption about a sustainer. Hume also asks, who designed God? He believes that the argument is prone to an infinite regress. "If the material world rests upon a similar ideal world, this ideal world must rest upon another; and so on, without end."
In an attempt to prove the existence of God, therefore, the Design argument remains inconclusive. It rests on individual judgement. As Vardy states, it owes more to its "persuasive power than to its logic."
Clack, Beverly and Clack, Brian (1998) The Philosophy of Religion: A Critical Introduction, Cambridge: Polity Press