This articulates the main crux of Plato's analogy regarding justice in the city and the soul. In the Republic, Plato attempts to explain how the city and the soul are composed of parts that are analogous to each other. The function of the parts in both the city and soul aim to achieve a similar outcome. Namely, justice and good health.
In Book 1 of the Republic, Plato aims to answer the question, what is justice and why should a person act in a just way? He demonstrates that it is in our interest to be just. Justice produces harmony, so justice for both the individual and the state, is profitable. "Since the most pleasant life is the happiest life, a person will be better off just than unjust." But is the analogy between city and soul strong enough to demonstrate this?
Plato's theory of justice is agent centred, suggesting that there are no moral rules or acts, but rather, focuses on what makes a good person. Once this good person is identified, we can then define the right actions that person would perform.
In order to identify a good person, Plato believes we are to look first at the state. Plato identifies justice in the state first, suggesting that it would then be easier to spot justice in the individual. Once we can understand what an ideal state is, we would be able to identify what justice is.
He argued that humans are all different and so different characters or personalities will adapt to different occupations. Plato did not think it was possible to practice many tasks or "arts" with success. "One man could not do more than one job or profession well." Therefore, he believed that it is best for people to stick to one job to which they are best suited.
In turn, this should help the state to remain ordered and harmonious, and therefore just. Different people would prove beneficial to the state by adhering to their roles. Plato identifies the virtues in the ideal state, which would be ruled by "'Guardians' who would devote their life to the common good," and these, Plato argued must be philosophers; for only philosophers have true wisdom.
Courage would be found in the city's police and army forces, known as Auxiliaries. "The city is brave in virtue of the bravery of the Auxiliaries."
The virtue of Temperance is somewhat ambiguous as it involves the productive classes as well as the Guardians and Auxiliaries. Annas states that it is "the agreement and unanimity of all three classes as to who shall be in charge."
Justice is the final virtue, whereby everybody in the state is doing that to which they are best suited, and the classes are remaining distinct from each other and are not interfering with the business of others.
An important aspect in constructing an ideal state is to "preserve the unity of the city." In order to do this, the attributes discussed should enable to construct an ordered, harmonious state. To Plato, this set up embodies the attributes of an ideally just city.
It seems strange that Plato can use the concept of an ideal society to demonstrate the same concept in an ideal soul. Book 4 in the Republic is dedicated to this doctrine. "The stretch of argument that follows aims at showing that the soul is complex enough to support the analogy."
Socrates discussed the relation of justice in the state to justice in the soul.
Socrates goes on to explain the soul as a divided self, concluding that the soul has three elements, which correspond to the three classes in the state. The first element is Reason, a virtue that allows us to learn, rationalise and seek truth. Its main function is to increase knowledge and to generally rule the soul, allowing it to correspond to the ruling Guardians in the state. Reason cares for the interests of the whole soul and not just for itself. "The intended parallel is clear with the Guardians, who are the only class to care for the whole city . . . and not just themselves."
Spirit acts as a kind of motivation, to aim at victory and take delight in winning. The spirited element of the soul allows for bravery, but must be subjected to training to avoid the part becoming too rough. This kind of training is analogous to the training the Auxiliaries receive.
The third part of the soul is Desire. This is the appetitive part, hungering for sex, food etc. The producers in the state correspond to Desire as they "attend to the city's biological needs." Plato wanted to stress, however, that desire can be educatable. An element of self-control can be taught, corresponding with the productive classes who know what is appropriate to their station.
Plato's job now that he has established the elements of the soul is to show how the virtues can become parallel to the virtues in the state.
Plato tries to clear this up by depicting that each part of the soul embodies the virtues of a functioning unity. The soul, like the state becomes wise when reason rules.
The soul proves to be brave when spirit becomes the ally of reason, as the Auxiliaries become allies to the Guardians. Temperance is achieved when a certain amount of self-control is practiced, and so acquiescing to the other parts of the soul. According to Plato, a person is just when each part of their soul is acting, as it should. Justice, therefore is the same in both the city and the soul. Everything is doing the job, which is best suited to them, and not interfering with the jobs of others. This is in some way, for Plato, connected with health.
Therefore, it is in our interest to be just, as it will ensure health and happiness. However, there are some problems with Plato's division of the soul. Each element overlaps. Each part have their own elements of reason, spirit and desire, which in turn can accuse Plato's definition of the soul as lapsing into an infinite regress, as each part contains an image of the whole that the theory was supposed to help explain. "This is clearly a hopeless way to understand the justice of the soul."
The soul can also be explained as having far more than three elements. Plato argues that the desire to do something is often followed with the urge to control the desire which splits the soul in to parts. Annas questions what happens when two motivational urges occur.
The soul therefore is surely too complex to sustain the analogy. It is not made up of simple parts that correspond easily with the structure and function of an ideal state.
Bernard Williams looks directly to the analogy and suggests that it does not work. He argues that the theory defeats itself, suggesting that if we applied a theory to the city just because it applied to individuals, then we have already explained how the theory can be applied to both cities and men. To take this and to try to further the argument by taking the same principle and trying to apply it to men, Williams argues, is pointless, since "the phenomenon which set off the search for the analogy in the first place . . . has already been explained. Williams goes on to argue that even if we were to presume that the principle applies to cities as common knowledge, then we end up with a theory that makes no sense.
The analogy, for Williams has defeated itself. But has Plato overlooked such a flaw? Or is the flaw really there? Jonathan Lear argues that Plato does not in fact think that something is applied to a state just because it is applied to its men. Plato does not suggest that a city is virtuous because its citizens are virtuous. Rather, the virtuous citizens are to shape the state "in their image." Lear concludes that therefore, virtuousness has not already been applied to both cities and souls.
But a fallacy is evident in Plato's analogy of city and soul. Plato disregards the option that two things do not necessarily hold the same meaning.
That is to say, that Plato is making points about the justice in the city and then using them to make points about justice in the individual, without considering the possibility that justice may mean different things in different contexts. Indeed, Socrates does state that things called by the same name are alike in respect to which the name applies." But Socrates has no explanation as to why this principle holds any water. The analogy, therefore, remains shaky.
To add to the debate is Williams's problem with the productive classes in Plato's ideal society. This class of people are described as "appetitive" or "epithymetic" Williams argues that a city cannot be just if the city holds a majority of people who are appetitive or epithymetic. He argues that some logic and reason is needed to help keep these appetites and desires in check.
Williams believes that this is a clear contradiction in Plato's analogy. However, Williams seems to forget that due to their education, the productive classes should not need to have their appetites kept in check by "forcible restraint." Certain unnecessary appetites would simply not surface after the right education. In a well-ordered state, a just person would desire the only appetites, which do him good and therefore keep him happy.
It is evident that the kind of justness that should be applied to a state is very dissimilar from the kind of justness that should be applied to the soul. Why does Plato commit himself to such an analogy then? Clearly, the analogy fails in several places. However, to disregard the analogy is to disregard Plato's main aim of the Republic. Indeed, the analogy can seem absurd at times, but Lear argues that this happens only if "one takes the analogy to be merely an analogy." For Plato, there cannot be different kinds of justice or goodness, because this is to "admit that not only justice, but goodness itself is not unitary." And this would negate Plato's main aim for a just and harmonious society.