Jackson's Knowledge Argument is an attempt to prove that there are certain facts about what it is to be a conscious subject which cannot be described by physical facts alone. It attempts to deliver an ontological claim for the non-physical fact. Physicalism is the theory that the world is entirely physical, and so physical knowledge is complete knowledge. In his argument against this, Jackson employs the following thought experiment: Mary is a super neuro-scientist who knows all of the physical facts about human colour vision, including all there is to know about the causal and relational effects of these phenomena. If physicalism is true then she knows all there is to know about human colour vision, as to think otherwise is to presume that there is more to know than every physical fact, which is rejected by physicalism. However, she has been brought up in a completely monochromatic room. When she is finally released from the room, and sees colours, Jackson's intuition is that she comes to know something she didn't know before, namely, what 'it is like' to see colour. He believes this can rationally be called learning and Mary's response on leaving the room would not be indifference. This disputes the idea that a complete account of consciousness can be given by physical facts alone and suggests that there is more to being a conscious subject than this.
Central to Jackson's idea of what lies outside the knowledge contained in physical facts are qualia. These are the qualitative contents of experience, the 'hurtfulness' of pain etc. Jackson rejects the theory that qualia are causally effectual which would support more of a physicalist viewpoint, that qualia are just part of the physical working of the brain. He asserts that although they affect other mental states, they do not make any difference to anything physical. This makes Jackson's view of qualia an epiphenomenal one or a belief that qualia lie outside the chain of causation, they merely a by-product of mental states and are
unable to cause any physical change themselves. There are several objections posed to epiphenomenalism, which assert that qualia, such as the hurtfulness of pain, must be able to cause changes in the physical world and so their occurrence must alter what is happening in the brain.
The first objection to epiphenomenalism cited by Jackson is that qualia cause the resulting behaviour seen in people and so must be causally effectual. However Jackson argues that the hurtfulness of pain isn't necessarily responsible for the subject displaying pain behaviour such as saying 'it hurts' etc, it could just be caused by damage to nerve fibres etc. He suggests that by reversing Hume, it could be said that anything can fail to cause anything. Despite the fact that B the causality of B following A may seem obvious and no matter how often B follows A, the hypothesis that A causes B can be overturned by a subsequent theory showing that A and B are just separate effects caused by the same causal process. He suggests that the connection between hurtfulness and behaviour is merely that they are both caused by certain occurrences in the brain.
The next objection relates to evolutionary theory. Physicalists argue that qualia evolved over time and so should be conducive to survival. They object that qualia could not help us to survive if they are unable to affect the physical world.
Jackson cites the example of polar bears who have thick, warm coats. It would be thought that a thick coat was conducive to survival but a thick coat also entails a heavy coat which is not conducive to survival. Thus, having a heavy coat is an inevitable by-product of having a warm one and the advantages of having a warm coat outweighed the disadvantages of having a heavy one so this characteristic was retained by evolution. Jackson argues that all evolutionary theory suggests is that any evolved characteristic will be either conducive to survival or a by-product of one which is. He argues that qualia 'fall into the latter category' as they are not conducive to survival in themselves but are a by-product of features which are. However, the debate is still left open. As
evolution does not merely retain features which are conducive to survival but also ones which are not actively detrimental to it, such as the appendix, qualia do not necessarily have to be merely by-products of mental states and could still be causally effectual.
The final objection relates to how people are able to find out about other minds. It is suggested that we know about other people's minds by their behaviour, or this at least plays a principle role in our acquisition of this knowledge. The objection questions whether a person's behaviour can provide any reason for believing they have qualia like ours, unless this behaviour is viewed as the outcome of qualia, which would be unacceptable to the epiphenomenalist, who cannot regard anything physical as the outcome of qualia. The analogy he cites in opposition to this is of a football match, following the game, a report appears in the Times and then in the Guardian. It would be illogical to suggest that the Guardian's report is caused by the Times' one but the latter would however provide good evidence for the former, behaviour could still give clues to a person's qualia. Jackson believes that it is possible to argue from one effect (qualia) back to its cause (brain states etc) and out again to another effect (behaviour). He believes it is irrelevant that neither cause the other. The epiphenomenalist would argue that qualia cause nothing physical but are merely caused by something physical. A problem with this is that the newspaper analogy doesn't adequately describe the complexities of the problem of other minds, however, Jackson suggests that this problem is not specific to epiphenomenalism.
Overall, Jackson acknowledges that although there is no concrete repudiation of epiphenomenal qualia there is no further explanation of them, they do not do anything or explain anything. It remains a total enigma how they can be reconciled to the view of science. However, he does not see this in itself as a valid objection to qualia. He believes that physicalism rests on an over optimistic view of the human species. He argues that we understand and sense only what we need to in order to survive through evolution and that natural selection has at
no juncture favoured individuals who were able to make sense of how qualia are caused or the laws governing them and that is why people cannot do this today. However, the physicalist could respond that this is merely an inductive chain of reasoning and that simply because natural selection has never favoured humans having this ability in the past, it is not inconceivable that it could do so at some time in the future.
Returning to the initial thought experiment, one of the possible objections to the knowledge argument put forward by physicalists is that although Mary does learn something new when she leaves the black and white room it is just new knowledge about old facts. What Mary acquires is prepositional knowledge, of physical facts under a different phenomenal concept, or a different 'way of knowing' about something. It is plausible they argue, that physical and phenomenal concepts are cognitively independent. It is possible to know simultaneously that x satisfies a physical concept whilst not knowing that x satisfies a phenomenal concept and vice versa. They would therefore perceive Jackson's thought experiment thus: with her complete physical knowledge, Mary knows that x is red as she knows that x satisfies the physical concept for redness (F). However, what Mary doesn't know is that x is red by knowing x satisfies G, where G is the phenomenal concept for redness- 'red looks like this'. Thus they would see knowing x satisfies G as just a different way of knowing red. F and G are just two ways of knowing one thing- that x is red. This is an account of new knowledge, without the new facts suggested by Jackson.
This idea feeds into what Frege refers to as different 'modes of presentation'. F and G are simply different ways of knowing the same thing. An example of this, using Mary again, would be that it is possible that Mary knowing that the evening star is a planet (Fa) is compatible with Mary not knowing that the morning star is a planet (Fb) as she does not know the morning and evening star are the same thing. It is no limit on her rationality that she doesn't know this. Mary knows the
same fact under two different modes of presentation or ways of conceiving. The co referring expressions of the morning and evening star have different modes of presentation associated with them as it is possible for Mary to understand both but still know the (Fa) without knowing (Fb). It would be incorrect for is to report that just because the 1) Mary knows the morning star is a planet and 2) the morning star is the evening star that Mary knows that the Evening star is a planet. These beliefs are different due to their separate impacts on behaviour. Describing someone's beliefs correctly is important for how their behaviour is rationalised. Therefore, different modes of presentation are required to make sense of a subject's behaviour, their take on the facts in question and so their perspective. The world strikes Mary differently to the way in which it strikes someone else.
However, this argument could now be seen to undermine the physicalist. The argument is now not simply concerned with new knowledge/old facts as the subject's perspective has been reintroduced, which is what Jackson was suggesting was not accounted for by physical facts. This new perspective was consequently not described in the physical description of facts which challenges the physicalist's assertion that this description captured all there was to know about human consciousness. The position put forward by Frege could even be seen as further elucidating Jackson's argument. Superman and Clark Kent could be viewed as two different ways one object strikes you. The concept that to be conscious is not just to know facts about something has is revived by the modes of presentation argument as Mary's new knowledge on leaving the black and white room is not merely old facts under new concepts as 'under new concepts' reinstates the idea of a subject's point of view which is what Jackson suggests is not included in the physicalist account. The argument put forth by Jackson is also further expanded by the links it draws between a subject's point of view not to special objects (qualia) but to the notion of having a way the world strikes you.
In conclusion, it appears that the new knowledge/old fact response, in the arguments put forward by Frege, is obliged to reinstate the concept of a subject's point of view which is part of qualitative conscious experience, something Jackson would suggest is unaccounted for by physical facts alone. This supports Jackson's argument against the physicalist that their project is 'over optimistic' and that qualia are essentially unknowable. They are a by product of brain states but do not initiate any physical change in themselves. However, Jackson's argument is also challenged by the ability response posed by physicalists. Whereas Jackson is suggesting that on leaving the black and white room, Mary acquires new knowledge, Ryle argues that she only acquires new abilities, which is seen as the difference between knowing how and knowing that. This also undermines Jackson's argument as it disputes the radical distinction he makes between qualia and physical makeup, from this standpoint, qualia are just knowing how to do something.
Finally, a more fundamental problem is posed to Jackson's argument and its insistence on qualia by Wittgenstein. He argues that philosophy has wrapped itself up in the debate about qualia as it hasn't fully grasped the logical grammar of what it is addressing. Saying 'I have this pen' involves totally different logical grammar to 'I have this pain'. He claims that this is a mistake built on the Cartesian model of the self who looks inwards for calibration of sensation terms, he argues that this is mistaken, as a language's meaning is determined through its public nature. Definitions of qualia are only ostensive definitions, they work against a background concept, a practice of putting names on sensations. In his private language argument he suggests that the kind of inward pointing done in relation to qualia etc is misguided as it is impossible to calibrate these terms in this way, you could be using them in a 'radically free way'. The private linguist does not even get off the ground as any private language would only occur on the basis of language originally being public. You can have private sensations or qualia but as soon as you talk about them you are using words which you learnt
through other people. He would argue that our language traps us into objectifying something which is essentially inexpressible
in language, as grammar is not set up to refer to the individual. Any debate about private sensations such as qualia therefore mistakes logical grammar.