Bram Stoker's Dracula, upon first impressions, seems to comply with this view. Mina Harker embodies all the good womanly virtues, while Lucy Westenra is a voluptuous blood-lusting animal. However, upon closer inspection, Dracula's representation of female sexuality seems to become blurred and the boundaries between gender roles fluctuate. Lucy, though vivacious, is well respected and virginal when we are first introduced to her. She transforms from angel to beast in just a few paragraphs. Mina, although an ideal wife for Jonathan Harker, is portrayed as engaging with modern technologies, making her resourceful yet unconventional. Many critics, therefore, have formed the view that Stoker's representations of female sexuality is inconclusive. The question is, why? According to Carol Senf, Stoker's treatment stems from his "ambivalent reaction to a topical phenomenon - the New Woman."
The New Woman emerged as a topic of controversy around 1894. She challenged the Victorian norms, encouraging women to search for freedom from domesticity. Some women advocated ambitions beyond motherhood and the right to sexual freedom and information about contraception and venereal diseases. Many represented the New Woman negatively, believing that they were threatening society and challenging gender roles.
Stoker seems to agree. The first women who appear in the novel are the female vampires who attract and repulse Jonathan Harker. The women appear to Harker at first as beautiful and "voluptuous," but he is soon shocked as they reveal their animalistic tendencies.
Harker becomes passive, allowing the female vampires to articulate the gender reversals which seemed so threatening at the time. Further on in the chapter, Harker hears a "low wail, as of a half smothered child," and realises that the vampires are feeding on a baby. They are the perverse versions of the New Woman, portraying the anxiety that maternity was at stake.
Indeed, the female vampires seem to embody fears about the New Woman. But was this Stoker's main aim? Gender reversal is a common theme throughout the book, one we can also see in Dracula's quest to claim not only the women in the novel, but the men also. Some critics see only Dracula's goal to possess and repress the female characters. Bram Dijkstra explains why:
Is Dijkstra underestimating Stoker's abilities to veil homosexual intentions? Dracula scorns the female vampires when he finds them seducing Harker and cries out, "(t)his man belongs to me!" Dracula utters a similar phrase towards the end of the novel, when he is taunting the Crew of Light. "Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be mine." This suggests that Dracula's ultimate desire is to possess the men, who in turn make it easier for Dracula to access them, by pumping Lucy full of their blood. She receives four blood transfusions, where the blood of the males are in effect mixed together. Lucy is already more receptive to Dracula's bite as she is sexual and vivacious so the men's blood will eventually filter through Dracula's veins. This questions the function of female sexuality in the novel. Do females act as mere vessels to hold the blood of men which will eventually be sucked from her?
Like the female vampires, Lucy also portrays attributes of the New Woman. Though she is presented as a lady, well respected and esteemed, she still adopts attitudes which connect her to the New Woman.
These desires imply that Lucy wants to break from convention and challenge her social role. Even Lucy admits that "this is heresy." Searching for new, decadent experiences, Lucy "bears the stamp of the degenerative New Woman." Lucy's polyandrous desire to marry all three suitors degenerates her to an animal, a blood-sucking vampire. She is therefore a threat to society. And the only way to eliminate that threat is to destroy it. Thus we witness the scene of Lucy's ultimate destruction by the men.
Many critics agree that this scene portrays sexual violence. It seems that Stoker is explicitly exhibiting his hatred towards the New Woman who needs to be destroyed and eradicated from society. The fact that the violence is particularly sexual may be a response to Jack the Ripper who was causing much disturbance at the time.
The Ripper murders aimed to cleanse the streets of prostitution and the consequences of prostitution - syphilis. The physical change in Lucy's appearance as she gradually changes from an angel to a vampire could be analogous to the changes one suffers when contaminated with sexual diseases. "The physical transformations suffered by the innocent victims in the novel suggest the dangers of syphilis." Venereal diseases threatened to degenerate society, and female sexuality was seen as a prime cause.
Around the time of publication, misogynistic attitudes were rife. The physician, Nicholas Francis Cooke stated that women "do not shrink from the most atrocious crimes . . .Women are more merciless, more bloodthirsty than men." This view is clearly depicted in Stoker's representation of Lucy and the female vampires. Van Helsing convinces the men that reversing gender roles is evil and even Arthur almost succumbs to the New Woman's kiss. The scene of Lucy's destruction allows the men to correct the initial penetration and gender reversal. The woman is made passive again. They are punishing Lucy for being over-sexed, for hungering for sex rather than maternity. We see this in the way she flings the child to the floor in order to kiss her potential husband. This battle between good and evil becomes a battle to restore Lucy to purity and sweetness. The decapitation of Lucy also impacts on the concept of motherhood, acting as a "fantastic but futile hope that maternity and sexuality be divorced."
The "Bloofer Lady" portrays the confusion of gender roles. Lucy preys on young children and treats the child she brings back with her with nothing that resembles motherly love or affection.
Prioritising sex over maternity was seen as an attribute of the New Woman. However, many of the New Woman writers at the time would have been offended by Stoker's representation of Lucy. Sarah Grand, one of the first New Woman writers, in fact stated that it was a woman's job to be patient and nurturing.
However, perhaps Stoker was not totally oblivious to these appeals. For Mina Harker is the true maternal Victorian woman, helping and comforting the men in the novel. But doesn't she, also, inhabit certain attributes of the New Woman?
Critics agree that Mina represents the intellectual New Woman. She is thoroughly modern, using technological advancements to integrate herself in a society full of men. She wants to master the art of shorthand and she learns the train timetables off by heart. However, these virtues are merely for the good of her husband.
Stoker seems to condone certain New Woman attributes as long as a woman is contained within marriage. The difference between Mina and Lucy is their reaction to Dracula. While Lucy succumbs easily, Mina is filled with horror when she recounts her ordeal with Dracula. "Unclean, unclean!" she exclaims. Mina's refusal of the count and her disgust and repulsion towards him allows her to retain her purity
Van Helsing praises Mina's character. "She is one of God's own woman, fashioned by his own hand. . . So sweet, so true, so noble." Helsing is articulating the common prejudices of the Victorian era. Indeed, Mina is a faithful wife to her husband and she exhibit's a desire to nurture and comfort the men in the novel. But at the same time, she is resourceful and independent.
According to Elaine Showalter, this makes Mina a "dangerous hybrid." Because she is domesticated to a certain extent, the men in the novel can partially control her. As the search for the count intensifies, Van Helsing decides it is time to exclude Mina from the plans to destroy Dracula, in order to protect her well-being which would ultimately have effects on her maternity.
But the New Woman in Mina cannot accept being silenced. She begins to have troubled dreams, she feels anxious and depressed and the lack of confidence given by the men makes her hysterical. Is Stoker portraying the confusing, ever changing attitude of female sexuality, which so caused misogynistic views? Cooke also stated that women were "inconstant and changeable."
Something in Mina is attracting punishment of some sort as she is eventually subjected to Dracula's bite. Interestingly, by excluding Mina, the men have indirectly allowed Dracula to claim her. Like Lucy, Dracula is using Mina's mind and body to access the men in the novel. He can read her thoughts and vice versa. "When my brain says 'come!' you shall cross land or sea to do my bidding." Again, we ask whether Dracula's use of Mina is merely to possess the men.
Taken as a whole, Dracula seems to represent Lucy as representing the fears of the New Woman, while Mina depicts normality reinstated. Little Quincey, a confirmation that Mina's maternity was protected, represents the "natural order and rectification of conventional gender roles." It seems that the vicious battle between good and evil hinges on female sexuality. The restless frustration to capture and destroy Dracula seems to depict the same desire to repress and control women of the era who were increasingly becoming more independent and lacking traditional Victorian virtues. However, Mina Harker does in fact embody many modern traits as a woman. Perhaps, according to Carol Senf, Stoker was trying to suggest that modern women could "combine the best of the traditional and the new." His general representation of female sexuality, therefore, remains decidedly ambivalent.
It cannot go unnoticed, however, that Dracula is possibly trying to hide homosexual desires. One may ask what the females in the novel have to do with this.
This ideology is evident in Dracula when considering certain scenes. Dracula decides he wants Harker for himself only once he has seen his vampire daughters try to seduce him. Dracula sucks Lucy's blood which in fact has been mingled with the men's blood, following several blood transfusions. And finally, Dracula uses Mina as the surest means to get to the Crew of Light. Are the female characters merely a thin veil to hide the undertones of homosexuality in Dracula? If so the novel is possibly suggesting that female sexuality is the ultimate downfall and degeneration of men.