Kant's version of transcendental idealism relies on the view that our experience of things is how they appear to us as opposed to how they are in and of themselves. Kant agreed with the Berkeleyan view that the only things which exist are minds and things that reside in the mind. Physical objects, such as tables and chairs are merely mental entities and collections of representations. As in the quote above, Kant believed that there are outer objects which exist outside the mind. However, we do not experience these objects as they are independently of us, but rather, we have responses to these objects and therefore experience them from a distinctly human perspective.
For Kant, objects of experience are appearances. These objects exist in space and time and as James Van Cleve states, "they include things seen, felt or otherwise perceived." Many philosophers regard Kant's transcendental idealism as a version of Berkeley's idealism. Henry Allison claims that Kant is "an inconsistent Berkeley." However, Kant argues that Berkeley disregards objects which exist independently of us. If they are just ideas in the mind, then experience is a systematic illusion.
Berkeley also believed that God implants ideas in our minds. Kant thinks this makes us passive. Kant's transcendental idealism considers objects which are "things in themselves." These are objects which exist independently of us and we have experiences of them only because they impinge upon us. These "things in themselves" are the grounds of our experience. We cannot, however, according to Kant have any real knowledge of these objects as they really are. For example, when we see a table, we see it as being square. But Kant does not believe that it is really square in and of itself. That is only the way it appears to us. Since spatio-temporal objects are the only ones given to us, all objects for us are therefore, are appearances.
However, Kant also argued that although appearances or experiences are of things in themselves, they are not representations of things in themselves. If things in themselves were given to us, then this would require us to have immediate awareness of them and would therefore conflict with the idea that we have no knowledge of such objects. Many find fault with this concept. Georges Dicker states,
Many would agree with this criticism and claim that Kant is guilty of contradicting himself. However, Van Cleve argues that in fact, Kant is not being self-contradictory.
Kant's position is a controversial one which conflicts with many prior realist assumptions. He argues that the empirical world, consisting of objects in space and time is a product of the activity of the human mind. Kant offers two main arguments to back up transcendental idealism. The first assumes that we have synthetic a priori knowledge of geometry. For example, the proposition that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line, is synthetic a priori. It is synthetic because its truth cannot be determined by the concepts "straight line" and "shortest distance between two points." The reason it is a priori is because it is necessary as opposed to contingent. We do not need empiricism or experience to know it is necessary. Kant argues that we are able to reach certain synthetic a priori knowledge by the use of transcendental idealism. Propositions about the empirical world are made true by the activity of the human mind. The mind structures and shapes experience so that experience conforms with the propositions.
Many philosophers have found fault with this argument. A common objection is that the argument assumes that the proposition will be synthetic a priori, but this is not always the case.
Geometers nowadays distinguish between different types of geometry. Van Cleve states that geometers often "define a straight line in just the way . . . Kant says we should not: as a geodesic or shortest line between two points." This makes the sentence analytic and not synthetic as Kant would have wanted. Critics also argue that physical space is in fact non-Euclidean, so the shortest distance between two points is not a straight line. These objections demonstrate that the propositions are not in fact necessary but contingent and therefore undermines the a priori status of them. However, Van Cleve addresses the issue that geometers have merely modernised terms and therefore altered the status of the propositions.
If meanings of words have been changed, then Van Cleve argues that this poses no challenge to Kant.
Kant asks how it is possible to have empirical knowledge about outer objects. He disregards the realist explanation that our experiences conform to outer objects and that they represent them as they are independently of us. In his preface to the second edition, Kant suggests that what is needed is a Copernican Revolution.
In general, this aims to turn the traditional assumptions on its head, and the Copernican turn endorses transcendental idealism.
Rather than think of knowledge as conforming to objects, we should think of objects as conforming to our knowledge. We make the empirical world the way it is simply by experiencing it the way we do. Van Cleve states, "Objects in question owe their very existence to being cognised by us." Therefore, knowledge is determined by the knowing subject rather than the object and so we are left with necessary, a priori knowledge. This can explain some of the objections to transcendental realism which haven't been answered before.
A transcendental argument consists of a claim which is universally accepted as being true and if denied would seem absurd. For example, the claim, "I think." The argument then demonstrates that the claim can only be true if another claim, one which is more controversial, is also true. For example, proposition P is true and accepted as being true. Proposition Q is contentious. If one believes proposition Q to be true, they must convince people that it is true. To construct an argument for Q, one must prove that Q is true in order for P to be true. The truth of P therefore, presupposes the truth about Q. If people believe P then they must believe Q. Kant outlines this classical argument in the Transcendental Aesthetic.
However, what if one was to deny the truth of P? If, for example, we take the truth about geometry and we have a proposition about physical space, such as "the shortest distance between two points is a straight line," one could argue that space is non-Euclidean and argue that the proposition is not necessarily true, but contingently true. This would pose a problem for those who want to prove that Q is true. As Van Cleve states,
This demonstrates that sometimes, transcendental arguments fail. In fact, many conclusions brought about by transcendental arguments are shown to be analytic rather than synthetic. The arguments identify "mere 'subjective conditions of thought' rather than demonstrating objective validity."
Most philosophical positions agree that objects of our cognition are transcendentally real. These objects have the constitution which we represent them as having independently from us and so they can be known as they are in themselves. This claim is known as transcendental realism and Kant disagrees with this view. He argues that realism does not explain how empirical knowledge is possible or how experience can deliver knowledge. Realism seems to create a gap between us and the world. Henry Allison, in his defence of transcendental idealism, argues that, "transcendental realism is incapable of accounting for the possibility of knowledge of an objective temporal order." Allison, however, disregards the objection that transcendental idealism is no better than realism as it cannot offer an explanation as to how empirical knowledge is possible either. Kant may seem to be guilty of falling into Berkeley's position as he seems to imply that in a way, we create reality. This was in fact, something Kant wanted to avoid. P.F. Strawson says,
Strawson conveys that according to the doctrine of transcendental idealism, we can only ever know appearances but never reality. Van Cleve also takes a look at the objections made by Bertrand Russell and G.E. Moore. Russell accepts that according to Kant, the truths of arithmetic and geometry are necessary and owe their necessity to our cognitive constitution. Russell, however, argues that it is contingent that we have the constitution that we do. He questions whether things would be different if our nature would change.
Russell argued that this possibility never occurred to Kant - a view shared by Moore. ". . .how can we know that all men's minds are so constituted as always to act in a certain way?" Therefore, the laws of arithmetic and geometry are not necessary after all.
However, Van Cleve protests that Kant gives the necessary truths of geometry a contingent grounding in our form of intuition.
Despite many objections to Kant's doctrine, there are many varieties of idealism and so it remains an open subject for debate. The main theory is that transcendental idealism denies that we can ever have real knowledge of a thing in and of itself. What cannot be debated about his doctrine, is that the problem of reality deeply objects to transcendental realism and therefore poses a big problem. However, although the case for transcendental idealism is significant, it is inconclusive and so seems falls short of a watertight theory.