It is widely believed that there are a large number of standardised restaurants such as McDonalds, KFC and Starbucks around the world. Standardisation refers to "considered to be the process of extending and effectively applying domestic target market dictated product standards tangible and intangible attributes" (Brotherton, 2006). Standardisation is used as the industry operation system in the hospitality sectors such as managing staff training, ingredients of food and it is commonly accepted majority of industries. In addition, the constant quality, for examples health, hygiene or safety can be delivered to customers by standardisation. Standardisation enables to assure managing service processes by staff education and quality checking (Johnston and Clark, 2001). It is enabled to deliver constant quality to customers. This essay will be mentioned the term standardisation in hospitality sectors. Following this, the characteristics of restaurant sectors and provides some examples of standardisation and customisation relate with Pizza Express which is one famous standardised pizza restaurant in the UK. Based on these examples, the criteria of standardisation will be evaluated. In the end, it is evaluated the argument and given conclusion.
First of all, the term standardisation is defined as equality in outputs for example products or services is performed and in the processes that produce such outputs (Wood, 2000). For instance, Kotas (1996) cites that the fast food restaurants, McDonald's and Burger King are based on strictly standardised rules. Especially, these large companies have own operation manuals or programmes. However, instead of standardisation, there is an alternative in the hospitality industry to standardisation is called customisation. What is meant by customisation is "customisation would suggest the adoption of a highly flexible customer market orientation to meet the diversity and variation in a company's various market segments" (Brotherton, 1997). Customisation can be customised and flexible for responding customers' needs. For example, some pizza restaurants such as Pizza Hut, enable to choose pizza topping by customers themselves (Lockyer, 2004). Sandoff (2005) states that it is possible to offer unique service and originality for guests compare with standardisation. Currently, a number of hospitality sectors such as hotel operations introduce customisation and more the range of services and products could be delivered to guests (Lashley and Morrison, 2000). Standardisation and customisation has an functional opportunity for developing the hospitality industry.
It is claimed that standardisation exists in the hospitality industry such as hotels, restaurants and catering. Also standardisation can be called "hard branding" (Brotherton, 2006). There are some reasons given why it is introduced in the hospitality industry. It can be possible to deliver appropriate products and services for customers needs used by standardisation (Lashely and Morroson, 2000). Johns mentions that standardisation helps to measure productivity such as food costing and staff relation. It is significant to respond customer expectation in the hospitality industry as a service sector.
For enhancing the service quality, it is important to standardise staff training with clear roles and procedures to follow (Hsieh and Hsieh, 2001). "More customers are looking for restaurants that offer comfort and value" (Powers and Barrows, 2006). Standardisation in managing workers will be obvious in staff skills, such as services. Moreover, Ben (2000) says that it is possible to mass-produce (economy of scale) products. The mass-production is enabled to save cost and time. Furthermore, the standardised products and services will be offered in low-price. For illustrate McDonald's puts into practice the one of strategies, mass production. On the other hand, if there is no existence of standardisation, it might be difficult to organise and manage industries. For instance, according to Wood (2000), two skilled chefs are able to make same traditional dish (such as Chicken Kiev) and if the dish is taste and also presented different way, then the customer regards that the restaurant is not well organised. It can be happen often the misunderstanding if staffs are not educated well. However, there are some disadvantages of standardisation. For instance, "Work standardization prevents the display of creative and innovative activities" (Kondo, 2000). It will be not easy for employees to work as creative, because standardisation lets the workers to work standardised.
Restaurants have been growing rapidly since the first restaurant appeared in the UK in the late nineteenth century, also it is developed that some restaurants run their business in the worldwide (Brotherton, 2006). The customers go to have meals at restaurants, because nowadays restaurants are convenient and providing variety of food to customers. The guests enable to get both tangibles and intangibles products. It is defined that tangibles are food, beverages and intangibles are services. According to Brotherton (2006), the most significant intangible element is the service; however, it is said that "the product is much more than just food and service, it is a 'complete meal experience'". There are different characteristics of the restaurant sector which are divided into four types of section, independent restaurants, chain restaurants, franchises and multiunit restaurant businesses. Firstly the independent restaurants run the restaurants with small scale and it is enabled to focus on customers needs and have unique characteristics (Brotherton, 2006). However, it is difficult to reduce cost and has limited bargaining power, because of the small businesses. Next, Brotherton (2006) mentions that the chain restaurants are more than two restaurants and normally owned by a company, such as McDonald's, and T.G.I. Friday's. Compare with the independent restaurants, the chain restaurants have a bargaining power also well-organised management (Brotherton, 2006). Then, the definition of the franchise restaurants are "a form of restaurant ownership where the parent company, the franchisor, allows other people, the franchisees, to operate clones of 'the business' under the same name and using the same systems and operating procedures" (Brotherton, 2006). Lashley (2000) cites that it might be standardized brand and operation system. Finally, multiunit restaurant businesses are usually a single company that owns and manages a several restaurants. City Centre Restaurants plc and Groupe Chez Gerard plc are examples in the UK (Brotherton, 2006).
Economies of scale such as mass production, provides important benefits for larger restaurants, also smaller restaurants are able to obtain advantages from specialized offerings and close relationship with customers.
This paragraph will be discussed about standardisation and customisation at Pizza Express which is Italian pizza style (Bold, 2002). Pizza Express was founded in 1948 and the first store opened at Wardour Street in London. It is UK based company and has approximately 300 stores with more than 6000 employees at present (Pizza Express Website). It is one of the successful private restaurants in the UK. There are some examples of standardisation in Pizza Express. Firstly, it is evidence of standardisation that all stores have the exactly same food menu and beverages with equal price and equivalent portion size. Customers are able to order meals simply from the standardised menu and their choices are just from the menu. It could be taste same each Pizza Express store. Also, pizza restaurants such as Pizza Express have the standardised ingredients of pizza, so that it makes clear for chefs when they make pizza. Moreover, the interior design are similar at each store and it might be unitised the concept for adults. Additionally, the table layout at Pizza Express is unchanged. What is more, the uniform is regulated, for instance, the servers wear black coloured tops with printed logo of Pizza Express and trousers. In contrast, it might be customisation that the store dcor is slightly different each store; that is in the case, to compare two of Pizza Express stores in Oxford, there are some differences between these two. Although one of them has bar lounge space in the ground floor and dining area and kitchen in the first floor, the other store has an huge oven surrounding with the clear glass in the ground floor, so that customers are able to see how to bake pizza. The other fact is that Pizza Express has own jazz club with restaurants in London Soho, thus customers may enjoy having pizza and listening jazz music (Tyler, 2001). Furthermore, when consumers order pizza or pasta, they can decide to have seasonings like cheese and peppers. Therefore, the company combine both standardisation and customisation.
As it is mentioned above the paragraph, standardisation and customisation are considered customers' needs and also managing quality services. The criteria for evaluating standardisation are based on quality. If it is focused on quality, the important point is that how quality is standardised. Quality has intangible and tangible. Intangible might be delivering services and tangible can be providing as goods. Service is can be defined as the combination of outcomes and experiences delivered to and received by a customer. It is considered that it is difficult to measure quality of services. Then, it is the key that "total quality is about optimizing every process and output so that it fulfils the task for which it was designed, by identifying and achieving outcomes in a way that requires least cost and produces greatest value" ( Johns, 1996). In addition, Brotherton (2006) points out that the benefit of standardisation will be cost saving in service delivery, planning and supply.
All things considered, standardisation is a one of operation system which can be not only to deliver consistent quality to customers, but also to provide products. Standardisation has impact on service quality and it might be encouraging staffs and encounter service delivery (Sandoff, 2005). Thus, it is agreed that standardisation enable to deliver equal quality for customers and it makes sure that staffs can deliver the quality to guests. Moreover, according to Johnston and Clark (2001), the service experience is directed by customers' experience of the service. Standardisation is the controlling of the output activity and service quality (Sandoff, 2005). It will be possible that the hospitality sectors improve the service quality with standardisation in the foreseeable future.