In his book, Kes, published in 1968, the author Barry Hines tells us about the story of a young boy named Billy Casper. At a stage of the story, Billy is asked at school to write a 'tall story'. This passage is very instructive about Billy's life, even if it is very short, it's full of information about his life and generally speaking, about life in England in the 60's. We will now, in the first paragraph, explain why this story is important to the themes of the novel and what it tells us about Billy's life. Then, in an other paragraph, we will see how his life would have been affected by Thatcherism.
At school, Billy's teacher, Mr Farthing asks the pupils to write a 'tall story'. He describes it as a 'piece of fiction, an imaginary story'. Billy 'dipped his nib right up to the metal holder, then balancing on the front legs of his chair, book and head askew, began his story'. He then writes a day, in which everything is perfect for him. We can consider that Billy's story can fall into 4 themes: the food, his house, his family and school. Even if the story was supposed to be fictionional, Billy's story is far from being really imaginary. We will now see why.
The first main topic Billy deals with in his 'tall story' is food. He imagines that his mother brings him breakfast in bed, with bacon, egg, bread, butter and a big pot of tea. For his tea he eats chips and beans and he can eat ice cream in the cinema. Finally he eats fish and chips for supper. What can appear to us as casual meals turn out to be incredible for Billy. That theme allows us to understand Billy's lack of food, and also explains why Billy is so underweight. This is highlighted later in the book when Billy prefers to buy some fish and chips instead of betting on horses for his brother.
The second main topic in his story is his house. He writes that he lives in a big house up on the edge of the moors, with carpets on the stairs and in the hall, and also with central heating. What we can see that here is a description of the house Billy delivers newspaper to at the beginning of the story (on page 20). The house is at the top of the moors, far from any other. He also sees that 'the hall and stairs were carpeted. A radiator with a glass shelf ran along one wall (...) there was a big fire in the room'. Billy's real house is cold, as it's described on page 11, 'it was gloomy and cold without the help of the fire'. Moreover, his real house is probably one of those done-up miners' cottages, tiny and cramped between two others. This leads to problems such as lacks of privacy for instance.
The third main topic we can find in his story is everything that is related to his family. Thanks to his story, we can understand that his father left home when he was young and that he misses him (in his story he writes: '(...) my dad came in carrying his case that he took away with him. I haven't seen him for a long time but he was just the same as when he went away. I was glad he came back (...)' ). On the other hand, we understand the problems he can have with his brother. Given his father has left home, his father spends his time bullying him. So, in his 'tall story' his brother Jud has gone to the army and he'll never come back. This arises other problems such as his lack of parental bearings, and roughly speaking his lacks of love at home.
The last topic present in his story is school. We find many allusions such as 'when I went to school all the teachers were good to me and they said "hello Billy, how are you doing?" and they all patted me on the head and smiled and did interesting things all day'. This extract helps us to understand that Billy doesn't like school (later on in his story, he even writes '(...) my mother said I was not going to school any more'). At school he is bored, and everybody, pupils and teachers are picking on me.
These themes are important to understand English social problems in the sixties. It especially focuses on the problem of North England, like in Barnsley (South Yorkshire), where the story takes place. We also see, thanks to this story that Billy didn't enjoy his life. We could also say that this story highlights the wealth gap, as it is depicted in the book, between the house 'up the moors' and the workers' housing estate. But, even if the situation can look bleak at that time, how would it have been 20 years later, under Thatcher? We will thus start with a presentation of Thatcher and the so called Thatcherism. Then, we will describe her program and her reforms that could have an importance in Billy's life.
Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979, and was re-elected twice, in 1983 and 1987. As a member of the conservative party, her opinions are characterised by the will to abandon the welfare state and the Keynesianism (with government funding into economy) and to promote privatisations. She was also nicknamed the 'iron lady', given her strong will especially against unions. This action starts since 1980, when on the second of January, the Iron and Steel Trade Confederation called its members out on strike for a pay dispute. Wanting to prove her determination to break the power of the unions after the victory of the miners in the strike of 1972, she asks her Employment Secretary, Jim Prior, to make picketing illegal. Nonetheless, Prior resisted her demands and the steel workers won (Prior was critical about her economic program, as he writes in A balance of power, Hamish Hamilton, 1996, 'Margaret's economic policy was dictated by the belief that sound of money was the essential requirements for a successful and stable nation. (...) The idea of pumping money into the economy to reduce unemployment was anathema'). But Thatcher didn't give up and in 1982, Prior's successor, Norman Tebbit, clearly more aggressive than Prior, passed the Employment Act, that made Unions 'liable for damage in the case of unlawful industrial action'. This was not the end of her fight against unions. On the 25 th January 1984, Howe, her Foreign Secretary at that time, announced a ban on Trade Unions, justifying it on grounds of national security.
One of her major reforms was the closure of mining pits. She had first intended it in 1981, but due to low stocks of coal to stand a strike, it was postponed. Nevertheless, the idea came back in 1983, when the 'Monopolies and Mergers Commission' reported that over 75% of coalmines were making a loss. 20 pits were announced to close, and the reaction started on the 1 st of March 1984 in Cortonwood. Nevertheless, even after over one year of strikes all over UK, Thatcher never dropped it and finally all pits but 15 closed.
Her reforms also included lots of privatisations. According to her, given that the national companies were supported by the state, there was little chance of bankruptcy and thus, no motivation for competition. And of course, the government benefited from the sales of those companies. She also declared that, thanks to those privatisations, 'the state's power reduced and the power of the people enhanced' (from Thatcher, The Downing Street Years, Harper Collins 1993). At the end of her 12 years at the head of the government, over two thirds of the industrial assets owned by the state had been sold. This includes the NHS, or utilities such as water or electricity.
She also reformed education, through the 1988 Education Reform Act: University Grants Commission was replaced by a University Funding Council to remove the prohibitive cost of expanding the numbers of students in higher education
After having outlined her policy, we will now consider how Billy's life would have been affected by it.
Barnsley and Yorkshire generally speaking, relied a lot on industry and more specifically mining industry. As the figure from Miners on Strike, Andrew J. Richards, 1996, show, there used to be 56,000 miners in Yorkshire in 1984. All of them had been sacked or their jobs were not replaced from 1984 to 1994. It is more than probable than Billy would have gone down the pit, even if he didn't want to, there were really few possibilities for boys at that time (reality highlighted when Billy meets the Employment Officer pp.168-172). And considering the poverty of his family, and the 1988 Education Reform Act (explained above), Billy would not have had the means to go to high school. It is then logical to think that Billy would have lost his job and would have gone to the dole. But, at the same time, Thatcherism didn't help unemployed, and didn't finance any program to revive the old industrial sectors. He would have then have many difficulties to find an other job (according to Work, Employment & Society, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 483 - 502 unemployment was around 17% in Yorkshire in 1991). He probably would have moved away to find a job. The social life of Barnsley would also have been really affected. First, because of the huge cuts in social funds, as part of a reduction of public costs and also because the miners knew each other, they were friends and loved to meet each other after work. No more mine, no more mining associations. After the failure of the strikes of 1984-85, the importance of the unions had decreased. Unions that used to be a bond between miners suffered a lot from the loss of the struggle against Thatcher's government and many of the workers themselves tore away.
As we have seen, even if it is quite difficult to imagine the life of Billy under Thatcher, we can easily predict that the consequences of her program would have been fatal for him, but also for the biggest part of the inhabitants of Yorkshire generally speaking.
To conclude, Kes is a description of the Yorkshire mining industry of a pinpoint accuracy: not only the accuracy in the descriptions of the places and landscapes, but also the accuracy of the atmosphere that reigned in the 60's in Northern England. Thanks to his 'tall story', the reader can understand through the eyes of a child the hard reality of the time. That whole part of England, which relied a lot on the mining industry, was hit terribly by Thatcherism and it is sure that Billy's life would not have improved at that time. Even though since 1991, Yorkshire has experienced a form of economic recovery, it is still behind other parts of England on a wealth scale.