The first low cost airlines appeared at the beginning of the 1990's in the United-States. The idea was really successful and it quickly spread all over the world. As the number of these companies grew, prices went down and flying became a cheap and easy way of travel. But nowadays, no-one can say they have never heard about global warming, which has affected it. Advertising campaigns spur us on to switch off the lights, not to leave the appliances on standby or to avoid taking our cars. However, really few of these campaigns regard flying pollution as a major contributor. Nevertheless, the three articles provide us with frightening information about the effects of flying on the environment. Given the boom in the number of low-cost companies and the multiplication of the numbers of flights, flying has become a source of worry. We will in the first part describe what problems are faced by the airline carriers, and we will in the second paragraph see the proposed solutions and discuss them. Finally, we will try to propose our own solutions and we will conclude.
The problem is really clear and is effectively summed up in the part called 'The facts about flying' in the article published by The Independent: since the gasses emitted at altitude have 2.7 times the environmental impact of those on the ground, flying pollutes much more than any other way of traveling, and proportionally much more for short-distance travels and, even if today the pollution caused by flights is not that important (3 of total man-made emissions worldwide according to the Economist), it could become in the next few years the major source of worries if unchecked given that the number of flights is soaring (plus 4.25 a year in the UK). However low cost companies base their business mainly on short-distance flights. They are thus faced with a dilemma: on the first hand, continue their successful business like that based on short-haul flights or, on the other hand, reduce their business, or even change it totally, in the respect of the environment.
Many solutions are proposed in these articles. The first one would be simply to reduce the number of flights. Some propositions are then put forward: to develop public transport and improve car efficiency (but it would not work for long hauls), increase ticket prices mainly by adding taxes such as carbon-offsetting (when you have to pay a little fee that will finance tree-planting or energy saving schemes), nevertheless this argument is contested because it would mean in that case flying would only be for well-offs. Even if it is not said in those articles, we can not forget that reducing the number of flights would also reduce the number of people who live thanks to the flights, especially all the people of the tourism industry. Other solutions that would reduce aircraft pollution without directly cutting the number of flights are also proposed: to create CO 2 caps and carbon-trading, to avoid crowded airports in order to avoid planes having to circle wastefully (and also usually carrying extra fuel in case they will have to wait before landing, hence heavier planes and thus more pollution), or to make aircrafts be towed by electric vehicles once on the ground. However, those solutions do not really look efficient compared with the urgency of the problem.
We have to tackle global warming before it becomes too late, so therefore we have to do something about flying pollution. There are many solutions proposed in these articles but we also forget the passenger, who is himself directly responsible for the pollution, so why don't we just try to inform him of the consequences of the flights on the environment? Since that kind of campaign has already been done concerning cars, why not about planes? But in any case, if nothing is done to prevent global warming, global warming will prevent us from flying.