The diagnostic tool I will be analysing for this assignment is the thrombelastograph or TEG (Haemoscope, Illinois, USA). This is a point-of-care test for coagulation currently in use in cardiothoracic surgery and intensive care in the hospital in which I work, and which is increasingly being asked for by anaesthetists during other types of surgery, such as aortic aneurysm repair, radical neck dissection with insertion of free flap and other surgery with the potential for large blood losses or haemostatic disturbance. In these circumstances, TEG is requested in order to assess whether any coagulopathy is present during and after surgery, particularly in order to determine whether bleeding is occurring because of a disturbance in haemostasis or from a physical/surgical cause (such as untied blood vessel). Because my clinical area does not directly finance a TEG machine, I and my colleagues are not trained to perform the test, and so must request it from another area. Should this change, we would be reasonably expected to gain competence in taking samples and performing the test. Senior practitioners (such as myself) would be expected to become experienced and competent in the analysis/interpretation of TEG results, as we are with arterial blood gas analysis results, and as senior practitioners in areas already using TEG do.
In this assignment I will briefly discuss the scientific principles of haemostasis, the TEG and what it measures. I will discuss any evidence for its use, relevance and accuracy, and any advantages or disadvantages over standard coagulation tests, in relation to assessment of perioperative coagulopathy and transfusion requirements.
Literature searches were performed using Ovid Online, ProQuest and the National Electronic Library for Health.
Haemostasis is the continual process by which the body controls bleeding as a result of everyday injury to small blood vessels (e.g. from mechanical stresses, trauma) and larger injury from surgical/medical interventions and major trauma. Injury to a vessel exposes blood to subendothelial collagen and substances (such as adenosine triphosphate, ADP) released by damaged cells. These activate platelets, causing them to adhere to the vessel wall and aggregate to form a platelet-rich haemostatic plug which occludes the vessel and arrests bleeding within minutes (1 o haemostasis). Blood coagulation factors are simultaneously activated, mainly by exposure of blood to tissue factor, which activates factor VII. The various coagulation factors interact on the surfaces of platelets and other cells to generate thrombin from prothrombin. Thrombin converts circulating fibrinogen to fibrin, which stabilises the initial platelet plug, preventing secondary haemorrhage (2 o haemostasis). Thrombin also generates further coagulation by activation of factors V and VIII, and activates factor XIII which both cross-links fibrin to increase its resistance to the fibrinolytic system and inhibits fibrinolysis through thrombin activated fibrinolytic inhibitor (TAFI). In parallel with tissue repair, the fibrin plug is then broken down over several days; tissue-type plasminogen activator activates plasminogen to plasmin, which degrades fibrin to fibrin degradation products (FDP) such as fibrin D-dimer.
Thrombelastography was first described by Hartert in 1948. A pin is freely suspended in a warmed (to 37 oC) cylindrical cup by a torsion wire connected to a transducer. The cup oscillates around this through an angle of 4 o - 45 o for ten seconds, mimicking sluggish blood flow (see diagram,  accessed 12/04/2006)
A 360ul whole blood sample is added to the cup and as the clot forms the cup and pin become linked together, causing the previously static pin to rotate more as the clot becomes stronger and then less as clot lysis occurs. The rotational changes are monitored by the TEG system and the software then displays them both graphically and as a numerical assessment of the patient's haemostatic function, showing time to initial clot formation (R), time to maximum clot strength (MA), clot retraction and lysis (A 30). The TEG trace advances at a rate of 2mm/minute and so parameters are expressed in mm.
(See table below for definition of parameters)
Advancements in the system software now also allow automated interpretation of results. The physical viscoelastic properties of the clot are dependent on the interaction of fibrinogen, platelets and plasma proteins (Vig et al 2001), and so can be used to pinpoint any abnormality in a patient's particular haemostatic component or group of components. In simple terms, the stronger the clot formed the greater the torque applied to the pin and the wider the TEG trace will be; weak clots will stretch so the torque will be less and the trace will be narrower. Different traces are characteristic of different coagulopathies and in addition to being interpreted automatically by the TEG software, practitioners experienced in the use of TEG also develop a high degree of interpretative skill (Von Kier & Parker 2001).
The Haemoscope website () states "The TEG system is unique in its ability to detect the state, cause, and the extent of imbalance in patient hemostasis and in providing guidance to effective treatment.", and markets the system as a means of rapid monitoring of haemostasis at the point of care. The main patient groups on whom TEG is currently used are surgical and critical care patients (Mallett & Cox 1992, McKenzie et al 1999, Liu et al 2000, Vig et al 2001, Prisco & Paniccia 2003, Samama & Ozier 2003, Ward et al 2004 and Ward & Lewis 2004) although in a review, Luddington (2005) discusses evidence from studies using TEG to diagnoses coagulopathies in pregnancy, recurrent miscarriage and in noenates.
Historically, thrombelastography was first used clinically for haemostatic monitoring during liver transplantation, as described by Kang et al (1985). Of particular interest to clinicians has been the use of TEG to determine if poor coagulation function during liver transplantation is the result of heparin/a heparin-like effect, and if the effect is reversed by protamine, which several studies have found to be the case (Harding et al 1997). This effect had been causing difficulties in the field for some time, and the reason for it was not known. Although Harding et al successfully used TEG to improve clinical outcome and reduce blood product transfusion, a modified TEG assay (using heparinase-coated cups) was used and the sample group was relatively small (55 patients). Although the modified cups are available from Haemoscope, this variation means the positive clinical outcome in this case may not be used to support the likelihood of a similar outcome using plain/standard TEG or other modifications to guide treatment.
Haemostasis during liver transplantation, particularly orthotopic transplantation, is complex because of the major surgery involved, the anhepatic phase and the disturbance in haemostasis caused by the preoperative liver dysfunction, and is not yet fully understood (Luddington 2005). The complex nature of the disturbance of haemostatic function has not always been fully expressed or defined by disturbances in commonly used tests of coagulation such as prothrombin time (PTT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), international ratio (INR) etc, (Mallett & Cox 1992) not least because of the time lag between blood sampling and production of a laboratory result, which may easily be more than an hour (Samama & Ozier 2003). Achieving normal haemostatic function is vital for the success of the transplant, and running regular TEG samples has been used to identify qualitative disturbances in haemostasis quickly so they can be acted on appropriately.
The other surgical field in which TEG has been used extensively is that of cardiac surgery. Patients undergoing cardiac surgery are often placed on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), which induces complex disturbances in the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems, particularly in relation to platelet function (Mallett & Cox, 1992), because of the exposure of circulating blood to the 'foreign' surfaces of the CPB equipment. Routine coagulation tests do not assess the resulting alteration in the interactions between platelets and the coagulation cascade, merely whether platelets are present (platelet count) and time to initial fibrin formation (activated clotting time, ACT). No information is gained about platelet-fibrin interactions or physical properties of the clot, both of which are affected by CPB. Old studies (Spiess et al 1987) have shown that TEG had 87% accuracy in predicting post-operative haemorrhage and need for re-operation, as compared to ACT which had 30% accuracy, and conventional coagulation tests which had 51% accuracy. The use of TEG as a predictor of post bypass coagulopathy and use of a TEG guided algorithm for management of post-bypass bleeding has been found by several studies to significantly reduce transfusion requirements (Spiess et al 1995, Shore-Lesserson et al 1999, Bell, Anderson & Macfie 2001, Royston & Von Kier 2001, Samama & Ozier 2003). Although the findings of these studies demonstrate clearly the reduction in transfusion, and are stronger than the findings in liver/liver transplantation surgery, various modifications of the basic test are used, introducing a degree of variability between assays not present with normal coagulation tests. The most common modification used is that of heparinase-coated testing cups described earlier, but other modifications have been reported (Luddington 2005). This variability causes difficulties in assessing the sensitivity, specificity and utility of TEG as a whole, as each variation is almost like a different diagnostic test.
In all clinical areas, haemostasis must be achieved with minimal risk to the patient. The well documented risks of transfusion, such as transfusion reaction or infection (Blood Transfusion Service 2001, SHoT 2003), have been joined in the public perception by the small but possible risk of transmission of variant Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (vCJD). This has had an impact on transfusion service provision in the UK, most notably resulting in leukocyte depletion of blood for transfusion (introduced in 1998-1999), which has increased the financial burden of sourcing transfusion products. In addition, the donor pool is decreasing as screening becomes more stringent and exclusive, and is only likely to become more so. Consequently, in addition to the small but possible risks of transfusion increasing, the decreased availability of products for transfusion and their increased cost demands that clinicians must find means to avoid transfusion if at all possible, whilst not compromising the health and well being of their patients. In practical terms in the perioperative field, this means both minimising blood loss and careful monitoring to anticipate the potential for bleeding before it occurs and treating the imbalance proactively and pharmacologically if possible. Thus, any tool which demonstrates an ability to reduce peri-operative transfusion requirements is welcomed enthusiastically by clinicians.
Despite the evidence that TEG can be used in practice to reduce unnecessary transfusion of blood products, the results it produces have not yet been fully validated in the way that is mandatory for conventional coagulation tests (Intra and inter-observer variability, repeatability, calibrations, quality controls) (Samama & Ozier 2003). Most published studies are by clinicians rather than haematologists; Samama & Ozier (2003) report reluctance from biologists to support the use of point-of-care tests and point out that none have yet been accepted by the experts of the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.
Manspeizer et al (2001) found significant differences in TEG results obtained from the same patients when venous as opposed to arterial blood was used, although only a small number (40) of patients were used to produce a large (134) number of pairs of samples. In addition, provided the clinician is aware of this potential for variability and uses only one type of sample, this should not be a problem clinically. A standard operating procedure for sample taking and processing in conjunction with thorough staff training would minimise user error and inter-user variability.
Luddington (2005) commented that several studies (Camenzind et al, 200; Vig et al, 2001, Rajwal, Richards & O'Meara 2004) have reported problems with sample stability, but these have all referred to blood that has been citrated, something that is only necessary for the laboratory because of the delay in testing. Vig et al (2001) found that a rest time of 30 minutes was required between sample taking and testing to ensure stability. When using TEG within the clinical area 'at the bedside' as it is intended, this ceases to be an issue, and in fact having a rest period takes away the TEG's advantage of rapid testing of haemostasis. Concerns raised over variation occurring with repeat sampling from one sample of blood (Vig et al 2001, Zambruni et al 2004) are also only a problem in the research laboratory; in clinical practice, another fresh sample would be taken.
Rajwal, Richards & O'Meara (2004) were studying the use of TEG in children; in my clinical practice it is requested only for adult patients (at present) and so variability between adults and children is not currently a concern.
The lack of standardization of TEG analysis between centres is likely to be an increasing problem as the technique is continually being diversified to meet the needs of different patient groups and for research. In addition, an alternative instrument called the ROTEM (Sysmex, UK) is available, which uses the same principles as the TEG. Consequently, when reviewing the literature it is important to ascertain which instrument was used and whether any modifications were made.
Only two studies directly comparing TEG with common coagulation tests were found, Zuckerman et al (1981) and Avidan et al (2004). Zuckerman et al (1981) compared the abilities of TEG and the group of six commonly used tests (haematocrit, platelet count, PTT, APTT, fibrinogen & fibrin split products) to detect blood clotting abnormalities. This was a fairly large and thorough study, using native blood samples for TEG analysis within the same time frame as with clinical practice. After statistical analysis, it was found that there was a strong relationship between the TEG variables and the group of coagulation tests. The TEG was reported to be more sensitive to detection of clotting abnormalities both because it measured the interaction between all the components of the haemostatic system, unlike the conventional tests which measure plasma, and because it measures the whole process of clot formation. Against the TEG, Zuckerman et al (1981) did comment on the marked differences in interpretation found by previous studies; this is no longer an issue because the modern instrument has much higher quality print-outs and computer software to measure and automatically interpret results.
The second study, by Avidan et al (2004) does not directly compare TEG and routine laboratory tests in terms of the qualities of the assays themselves, but as part of structured algorithms to manage bleeding after cardiac surgery. This used a reasonable size of patient group (102), but in addition to the TEG also used three other point-of-care instruments. The study found that using a test-guided algorithm reduced blood/blood product transfusion when compared with clinical judgment alone, but found no advantage of either the laboratory-test guided algorithm or the point-of-care test guided algorithm over one another. This would seem to support the use of test-guided algorithms for blood product usage but does not provide any more information about the benefits or otherwise of TEG.
It is difficult to directly compare the TEG with conventional coagulation tests as they are so different, but it would seem more studies doing this need to be carried out, particularly in light of the massive improvements in technology and the increase in use of the instrument over the last ten years. A meta-analysis of the results of published studies would also be useful in assessing the utility of the TEG, although this may be difficult because of the number of modifications to the test currently in use.
Another issue which must be kept in mind is that of cost. I have already discussed the finance issues around transfusion, but there is also the cost of the tests themselves. I did not find any discussion of this in the literature, but it seems reasonable that the lack of processing, transport and laboratory staff required for TEG would reduce the cost, although the initial set-up is likely to be expensive. In addition maintenance of the equipment, including calibration and quality control, would be required.
There can be no disagreement that a reduction in the use of blood and blood products during surgery is needed, from a patient safety, resource management and financial concern. There is a great deal of evidence that TEG has been used to achieve this in cardiac surgery, which is estimated to use 20% of the UK blood supply (Anderson et al 2006) and so it is reasonable that it could also be of use in general surgery. The rapidity with which a result can be obtained would be a massive improvement over the wait for laboratory tests of coagulation, which I have found in my practice can easily be an hour. With surgery such as aortic aneurysm repair, where massive volumes of blood can be lost and infusions given in minutes, by the time a result is obtained it is irrelevant, and consequently transfusion decisions are based on clinical judgment or ratio (i.e. four units of fresh frozen plasma given to each six units of packed red cells). The assertion by Avidan et al (2004) that transfusion should be based on a laboratory-test guided algorithm is not necessarily achievable in the operating theatre, both because of the time for testing and difficulty transporting samples to the laboratory. Although not yet validated, the use of TEG to guide transfusion would be an evidence-based improvement in patient care and would hopefully reduce unnecessary transfusions. As a scientific test, TEG needs to be more thoroughly tested to assess repeatability, variability etc, to establish accepted methods of quality control and calibration and to develop consistency between different centres. However, its sensitivity for detection of coagulation abnormalities is high (Zuckerman et a 1981) and the evidence for its use to guide transfusion requirements is strong. Conventional laboratory tests for coagulation continue to be the 'gold standard' but point-of-care tests such as TEG have a lot to offer to improve patient care. I believe that the use of TEG in my clinical area is justified, and if the introduction of the test was carried out with the co-operation and support of the haematology and blood transfusion departments many of the potential problems could be avoided. In addition, the widespread introduction of other measures such as perioperative red cell salvage, autologous pre-donation and other point-of-care coagulation monitoring (such as platelet function monitoring, activated clotting time and others) is likely to bring about a significant reduction in the transfusion of blood and blood products and thus both improve the patient experience and reduce the financial burden within the perioperative setting. The introduction of some form of guided protocol for perioperative transfusion seems both desirable and inevitable; the tests which will guide it remain to be seen.