Spatial analysis refers to the relationship between facts and locations. There are various types of spatial analysis, all of which are useful in their own way. These range from the simplest form of analysis; a query or selection analysis, to more complicated 3D spatial analysis. This analysis helps geographers to answer questions like "how many people in the United Kingdom live within 20 miles of a nuclear power station?". Spatial analysis can also be used to prove or disprove hypotheses such as the cause of certain diseases by finding areas of influence, common areas between maps or distance from map features.
One of the easiest and least complex types of spatial analysis is a query. This uses Boolean algebra to select areas of the map that meet the criteria given to it. The Boolean algebra can combine queries using the format, condition A = true (and, or, not, xor) condition B = true. Put into practice this could be used to find out which countries in the world have a percentage population over the age of 25. In this case, the percentage population of males would be condition A and 'over the age of 25' would be condition B. I used this type of analysis to find out if there was a relationship between the number of hospital beds per 100,000 people and the number of deaths per 100,000 in the counties of California. This type of spatial analysis is useful for finding out where something is and seeing if there are any spatial patterns such as clustering, dispersion or random. After doing this, it is possible to compare neighbouring polygons. When the similarities and dissimilarities are summarized for the spatial patterns, spatial autocorrelation is deduced. However, if only one map is queried, the pattern would only represent a snapshot in time and so would have to be compared to another map or we would have to look at spatial processes.
Another form of spatial analysis is calculation based. Within this type of analysis there are various methods of finding and representing the calculations. The first and simplest calculation is measuring or counting features such as the length of certain lines or areas of polygons. This can be done automatically by the computer. Another is calculating new attributes from old ones. This involves adding a new attribute which then works out a given value from two or more existing attributes. For example, if two existing attributes are population and area, another attribute could be added to find out population density (population divided by area). A slightly more complex calculation based analysis is the statistical analysis of feature attributes. This is done by breaking up the data into sets, which can be done through natural breaks, quantiles, equal intervals, Standard Deviation or averages. This makes the data much easier to interpret for analysis. After the data has been divided up, it is possible to summarize the data into lists, reports, counts and graphs or charts. Another calculation based analysis is the calculation of density in a space. When a single point 'phenomena' occurs, the density of these points in a space can be calculated using GIS. This can be represented in either a choropleth or isopleth map. In a choropleth map, the densities are shown by how many points occur within a certain area through the use of colour. However, the problem with this type of map is that it disguises the true spread of the data. Isopleth maps are a more revealing of the densities on the ground than a choropleth map. An isopleth map produces a continuous density surface which can be put into 3D to visualize spatial trends.
Distance based analysis can be very useful and has a practical element to it. A zone of influence is a type of distance based analysis which shows distance bands. These can be superimposed onto a distance map to see what distance certain features are from others. Proximity areas are another form of this analysis whereby areas of influence are drawn around each point. Equidistant boundaries are drawn up around each point so that where ever you are on the map, which ever boundary you are inside, you will be the closest to that boundary's point. A 'buffer zone' is the zone of influence around a feature such as a point, line or polygon. This can be used in the real world to find out the area likely to be affected by the noise of a new motorway and which residents will be compensated for double-glazing. This process of buffering can be multiplied so that several factors can be introduced (as in the area around the factory in practical 9).
Another GIS analysis is spatial coincidence and exclusion. In essence this is how different maps overlay and common areas between them. There are six ways of getting the maps to interact. The first is merging the maps, which joins them side by side. Dissolving the maps joins them together but only joins together factors that are common to both. Union combines the features of one layer with the polygons from another layer to form a single layer that has the graphics and attributes of both. Intersecting two layers involves cutting an input layer with a second to produce an output layer that has the features of both. Clipping takes one layer and cuts it to the extent of another and erasing is the reverse of clipping where only what is outside the clipped area is kept. After this, sieve mapping can be performed, of which there are two types; inclusive and exclusive. This can be used to narrow down possible locations for certain uses. It can also be used to monitor changes in location for example, hurricanes changes in land use. These changes can be identified as either before and after, a trend or a cycle. It is possible to union two maps together so that change can be calculated between the two.
Spatial modelling is a much more complex form of GIS analysis. 3D terrain models are made using point data which has to be sampled regularly in order for it to be accurate. Inverse Distance Weighting works out the height of the point as a weighted average of the height of the points around it. Another method is the spline method which fits a polynomial function based on the coordinates of the sample points around it. For an irregular sample of points, Delaunay triangulation is used whereby if a circle is circumscribed to any triangle, no points other than the vertices of that triangle should fall within the circle (see below), thus creating Triangulated Irregular Networks (TINs). This type of analysis increases the realism of the map as you have an accurate model of what the topography looks like. Terrain analysis can be performed from the TIN by mapping the contours, slopes, aspect and shading. A more practical use for a TIN is hydrological modelling to see where water will flow when it rains. Another real world use is visibility analysis, for example will people living in a certain town be able to see a radio mast 20 metres tall? It can also be used to see what landscapes would look like with different features on (trees, houses).
The final type of spatial analysis is network analysis. It is one of GIS's most widely used applications and is about modelling links between areas and points. It can be used to see how well areas are connected together and can be measured in various ways, either by distance, travel time, monetary cost or friction. On top of this, other issues have to be considered such as constraints which may slow down progress or restrict movement. This sort of analysis is applied in transport planning, civil engineering and navigation (GPS).
In conclusion, spatial analysis using GIS is applicable to various everyday things that we take for granted. It is very important to various industries such as the Environment Agency for flood plans and even to salesmen who need to find the shortest possible journey to take in order to save money as shown in Worboys.