Digitising is the term used for converting maps from analogue (real world maps) into digital so that they can be put onto a computer. The digital information can be stored in two different ways; raster and vector. Raster uses a grid to show the information whereby each grid cell is one map unit, all areas of the map are represented by cells even if they are 'empty' and each cell has one value. Vector uses Cartesian coordinate pairs as in a graph. One point is a single coordinate pair and a line is a series of coordinate pairs. Both of these methods have positive and negatives; however, there are several things that determine how useful the raster and vector maps are, for example the accuracy and precision of the data.
Raster digitising is the term given to describe heads up digitising on a computer screen using a mouse. One of the issues of this type of digitising is the threshold of detection of light. To overcome the detection of blotches, the threshold has to be set so that only the darkest pixels are detected. There is also the problem that all objects look the same, for example a lake and a forest. This is overcome by scanning the different objects in separately in layers which are then reassembled on the computer. This method is much cheaper than vector digitising and does not take much skill to perform; however, there is also a lot of redundant data. Vector digitising is where a tablet and puck are used to plot the points straight from the analogue map. How accurate the finished map is depends very much on the person doing the digitising and how close together the electromagnetic wires on the puck are. This method is very precise if it is done well and there is little post-processing work needed. However, it is a lengthy process and the operator needs training which is expensive.
The accuracy of the person or computer performing the digitising determines how reliable the map will be. For example, if an object is out on the computer screen by a few millimetres, this may translate (depending on the scale of the map) to one hundred or more metres on the ground as explained in Korte (2001) where he states that on a map drawn to a scale of 1 inch = 100feet, 90 percent of all points must lie within  3.3 feet of their true position. This is not so much of an issue if the computer auto-completes lines or polygons, as there is only the error of the computer. However, with manual heads up digitising it is harder to be accurate and even more so with tablet digitising as there is both human error and the accuracy of the computer involved. With both heads up and tablet digitising I found that I had to go back and redo some of the points as I had not been accurate enough the first time. It was even harder when using the stream-mode on the tablet, as if I made a mistake, I would have had to start the entire polygon again. There is also human error when copying land uses or building types, for instance, mistaking a school for a hospital, thus making the map useless. When performing tablet digitising, it is much more about the accuracy and precision of the person undertaking the digitising as the most amount of error is incurred when trying to match the crosshair on the puck with the point you are digitising on the tablet. It is also important to make sure that the analogue map is firmly fixed down before starting otherwise you would have to start again if it moved whilst you were digitising. Whilst I was using heads up digitising for the road network, I came across the problem of trying to get the lines to snap correctly on the screen
How precise the human and computer are also has an impact on the reliability of the map. It is virtually impossible to copy the analogue map perfectly but there are things that can be done to try and make it as good as possible, such as zooming in on the screen when digitising. When plotting the points for a line on the computer using heads up digitising, the precision of the finished line depends very much on the person performing the digitising. For instance, if someone plots only four points on a line and is zoomed out a long way, there is more chance of the line being incorrect than if they were to zoom in and plot maybe ten points or more. Zooming in will give a better resolution and therefore it will be more precise as I found out when I was tablet digitising the factory. I was fairly confident that I had been accurate with the puck in plotting the four corners of the rectangle, but when I looked at the screen to check my work, I found that the rectangle was not the correct shape. In order to combat this, one could try to look at the screen whilst digitising to check that it is accurate. With regards to zooming in, it is also important to check that there are no errors involving lines joining up incorrectly. For example when I went back to check that I had digitised the road network correctly, I found that there were several points which had either overshot or had not snapped properly. However, zooming in can cause problems, if the map is not in great detail the image will become distorted and fuzzy making digitising even harder. Therefore, the resolution of the analogue map plays a big part in how exact the digital map will be. With the raster data, the cell size determines the resolution, so the smaller the cell size the higher the resolution. With the vector data, the resolution is determined by the smallest possible distance between two points before they become one point. To get a better map, the resolution needs to be higher, but this also presents the problem that the size of the file will be bigger and so will take longer to load and may be difficult to transfer to other devices.
There are many steps that can be taken to make sure that the best possible map is achieved from digitising. It is important for the operator to be personally accurate with their digitising especially if they are using Vector digitising. Another method which I found useful as stated above was the simple tool of zooming in to make the objects larger so that I could be more accurate.