In the cities of the less economically developed countries in the world, social and economic inequalities are obvious to see. In cities such as Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro Mexico City, Lima and Jakarta these inequalities are represented in the form of slums or favelas. There are various social and economic issues that arise as a result of the favelas. The occupants of these slums who have built their own homes all have different reasons for why they are there. However, there are those who suggest that urbanisation is the result of only one major factor. For example the neo-liberal idea that it is due to purely economic reasons as a result of globalisation. It is safe to say that one way or another, globalisation has played a part in the rapid urbanisation of cities in less economically developed countries (LEDC's). However, there are other factors that come into play such as natural disasters and civil war.
The huge increase in urbanisation is the reason why the numbers of slums have also grown. As there seems no sign of this rapid urbanisation slowing, it is an issue that has to be addressed. According to a UN-HABITAT (2003) report, "the world's urban population is set to grow from 2.86 billion to 4.98 billion by 2030, of which high-income countries will account for only 28 million of the expected 2.12 billion growth". As the numbers of those moving to the cities gets higher, social, economic and environmental problems begin to arise. The influx of such a vast number of people puts a huge strain on resources and services such as hospitals and schools. As the population increases, not only does the amount of doctors per person decrease but also the risk of spread of infection increases due to overcrowding. As the size of the slums increases, water provision also becomes an issue. This is illustrated in Bangalore in Southern India where 20% of its population get their water from groundwater sources. These are not being replenished because natural marshland is being drained thus decreasing the quality of life in the area. This is not an issue that the more affluent percentage of the population has to deal with as they have their own water sources. The air quality is also likely to decrease due to an increase in the use of cars and public transport. For example in Bangalore, the number of motor vehicles registered is increasing at a rate of 25,000 a month. This puts a strain on the roads which the governments then have to maintain at a heavy cost (21.8 million to extend the road network). Due to the close proximity with which dwellers live, the chance of spreading diseases such as cholera and dysentery increases dramatically.
There are also inequalities present regarding the gender and age in the major cities in the third world. Those who migrate to the cities from rural areas tend to be young males who have aspirations of making their fortune in the city. As a result, there is a gender imbalance at both the source and destination. This leaves less independent males who are capable of working the fields and more dependent females. The larger proportion of men than women in the city means there is a higher demand for prostitution and thus the spread of sexually transmitted diseases such as AIDS.
Housing provision also poses a major problem in developing cities. As people migrate to the city in search of work, it is probable that they will have little money and nowhere to live. In Lima, many of the new arrivals will settle near where they hope to find work or where they arrive such as Port Callao. The work that they will do will most probably be informal and could be dangerous. The newer squatter settlements tend to be poorer such as Prima de Ernero which has no waste or sewage disposal. This is a big leap from the area of Mira Flores which is a much more affluent and high class area, protected from the slums by high walls and gates. Such gated communities are not uncommon in a lot of developing countries (especially South Africa) and cities where the richer minority protect themselves from those who they perceive as poorer and dangerous. As more and more squatters arrive at the cities, urban sprawl becomes a real problem. In Bangalore, urban sprawl was combated by setting aside land as a designated green belt. This led to pressure on housing within the green belt causing infill and the building of tower blocks. When the National Games Village was built in 1996 to provide accommodation for athletes, the slum dwellers were forced to vacate the land where the development was taking place and their homes were burned down.
It is undoubted that globalisation and the growth of trans-national and multi-national corporations (TNC's and MNC's) has had an effect on cities in LEDC's. The large gap in wealth between developed countries means that it is cheaper to produce products in LEDC's. The competition from other TNC's and MNC's means that companies are always trying to find ways of cutting costs. One of the many ways is to find cheaper labour which leads to the exploitation of workers. The TNC's can pick and choose where they want to invest, and so many governments in LEDC's will offer them ways to cut their costs in order to attract investment. Turning a blind eye to unsafe or poor working conditions is one way. The consequences of this were demonstrated in Bhopal in India when a Union Carbide factory spewed out poisonous gas killing thousands of people. Looking at the relationship between globalisation and inequalities in this way would imply that the TNC's and MNC's are completely to blame. However, the UN-HABITAT (2003) report suggests that it is not the companies that are to blame. "It is not globalisation, per se, that has caused countries and cities to abandon policies aimed at redistributing wealth to the benefit of the majority of their citizens. Rather, it is the perception of governments that their countries must be competitive in the world economy that has led to this policy shift". It also states that the competition for the investments from TNC's against Asian countries (such as Taiwan and South Korea) to improve their own economy is the reason for the vast inequalities in the developing world. Thus suggesting that the developing countries are to blame for the appalling conditions in slums rather than the TNC's. There are however exceptions to the principle that globalisation is responsible for the inequalities in LEDC's. Civil wars such as in the Gaza Strip and West Bank where people were forcibly removed from their homes and had to build shelters. Another exception may be in the case of natural disasters such as the Boxing Day Tsunami when a huge gap between the rich and poor opened up instantly. Another is the corruption in governments in developing countries by which the money given to them by the IMF's Structural Adjustment Programme does not reach its intended target. However, which ever way you look at it globalisation does have a huge impact on developing cities by keeping the poor, poor and the rich, rich.