In this essay I will be looking at how the formal properties of Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness (1899) and Ford Madox Ford's  The Good Soldier (1915) give order and articulation to the experience of modern life.
The word 'form' implies a structuring of some kind, and, when applied to literature, the formal properties of a work 'usually refer to its structural design and patterning, or sometimes to its style and manner in a wider sense, as distinct from its content.' So what are the structural designs of both Ford and Conrad's works?
A first-time reader of Heart of Darkness skimming through the work would note that the short narrative consists of three chapters of similar length. The piece is too short to be a novel, and so can be termed a 'novella', described as 'a fictional tale in prose, intermediate in length and complexity between a short story and a novel, and usually concentrating on a single event or chain of events, with a surprising turning point.' The structural design of The Good Soldier embodies that of a novel, '...an extended fictional prose narrative'. Greater in length than the novella, the novel 'permits fuller, subtler development of characters and themes'. Differing from the prose romance '...a greater degree of realism is expected of it...it tends to describe a recognisable secular social world, often in a sceptical and prosaic manner inappropriate to the marvels of romance.'
So both Heart of Darkness and The Good Soldier utilise traditional realist structural designs (i.e. the novel and the novella) and outwardly suggest an agreement with realism, 'a mode of writing that gives the impression of recording or "reflecting" faithfully on actual way of life'. Both texts, however, are far from being conventionally realistic. They are instead innovative, adapting these structural designs to give a stable body to an otherwise complex narrative. How then do Ford and Conrad subvert the structural designs they choose to utilise?
Heart of Darkness contains traits of Victorian realism, at the same time,
In this way the novella bridges the gap between Victorian and Modern novelistic styles. HOD can be seen as belonging to the genre of imperialist Victorian travel narrative. Written for Blackwood's Magazine, Conrad was writing for an audience that was 'conservative and imperialist in politics, and predominantly male'. Conrad lulls this audience by stirring up feelings of imperial pride at the beginning of HOD. Conrad does this by making reference to the actions of imperialist pioneers such as Sir Francis Drake, evoking 'the great spirit of the past' (p.17), only to present a story that questions the morality of imperialism. As Robert Hampson suggests, 'the narrative strategies of both Conrad and Marlow work to subvert many of the assumptions accepted by their audience'.
Conrad uses the enigmatic narrator, Marlow, to carry forward his subversive narrative. Unlike traditional Victorian narrators such as the technically distant, removed narrator in George Eliot's Middlemarch
 (1871) who reports the social commentary of the novel in the omniscient third person point of view, '... Marlow is such an unreliable narrator and only too ready to interpret facts in the light of his own prejudices." Conrad breaks the stereotype of the omniscient narrator that spoon feeds the reader information that is taken for granted as 'truth', Marlow's narration instead '...is essentially reflective' making HOD '...a narrative which works by means of suggestion rather than statement...concerned with asking questions rather than providing answers.'
As previously stated, Conrad is generally agreed between critics as a modernist writer. Richard Adams' description of modernist writing is useful, suggesting that,
Other than T.S. Eliot's The Waste Land (1922), James Joyce's Ulysses (1922) is the other 'major landmark' of modernist writing and is a great example of the stream-of-consciousness narrative method.
Conrad does not utilise stream-of-consciousness in Heart of Darkness but he utilises a similar narrative technique in the use of 'interior monologue' described as 'the written representation of a character's inner thoughts, impressions, and memories as if directly "overheard"..." Richard Adams notes that 'Heart of Darkness contains some notable examples of the operation of this method, moments where the articulation of Marlow's private thoughts threatens the chronology and the coherence of his narrative'. An example of interior monologue in Heart of Darkness is when Marlow reflects on the dark journey he has ventured on,
This passage is contemplative, its style is reflective and shows the psychological process of Marlow revisiting previous experiences. Sigmund Freud came up with his theory of psychoanalysis just after Heart of Darkness made its first appearance (in 1899), but the novella still contains some interesting connections especially in some of Marlow's dream-like descriptions,
Heart of Darkness reflects the mood of its era, with upcoming theories such as those of Freud and Darwin, what was once familiar quickly became complex and unfamiliar. Written at the end of the nineteenth century, the daunting fear of entering a new century is reflected in the novella's dark story.
David Bradshaw discusses the turmoil of the era in which The Good Soldier was written, an era '...of serious political, industrial, social and cultural unrest in Britain - the suffragettes, for example, had been in full cry - and the novel's predominantly wistful mood reflects Dowell's nostalgia for the era of early-Edwardian high style...'. Richard A. Hood describes The Good Soldier as '...a novel which shares something of the literary world of Conrad and Crane and Henry James, but which points, as well, to the "tapageur and riotous" new forms of Modernism just emerging'.
Like Conrad's Marlow, Ford utilises an unreliable narrator, Dowell, in The Good Soldier, who is described as '... English Literature's most fascinating enigma'. Samuel Hynes discusses the critical debate surrounding Dowell saying, 'The patent inadequacies of Dowell as a narrator have led critics of the novel to dismiss his version of the events, and to look elsewhere for authority'.
The Good Soldier consists of a reflective account by Dowell told in first-person narrative retrospectively, but unlike Heart of Darkness
The effect of this is that Dowell '...tells his story as a puzzled man thinks - not in chronological order, but compulsively, going over the ground in circles, returning to crucial points...what he is looking for is the meaning of his experience'.
Richard A. Hood in his critical essay discusses the narrative techniques of Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier and how they differ from each other. Hood suggests that 'Marlow's narrative is removed from any real experiential present (except as frame). Nothing in the immediate process of telling impinges upon the story itself. The focus is traditionally reflective.' Dowell on the other hand in The Good Soldier
Both The Good Soldier and Heart of Darkness are 'frame-narratives' that contain tales within a tale, what makes Ford's work even more difficult for the reader to decipher is that The Good Soldier is not a story, instead it is an act of narration consisting of Dowell's reflections and modified reflections of other character's reflections. It is no wonder that Mark Schorer in his critical essay compared the novel to '...a hall of mirrors...a bewildering maze, of past circumstances and future consequence that - somewhat falsely - it contains.'
It is clear from the first sentence in Dowell's account that it is not even his own story that he is telling. 'This is the saddest story I have ever heard' (p.13) is how Dowell begins his tale. Far from being an omniscient narrator, Dowell admits that what follows are reflections on someone else's story. As a first-person narrative, Ford makes it '...possible to eliminate authority altogether, and to devise a narrative which raises uncertainty about the nature of truth and reality to the level of a structural discipline'. Therefore, all the reader has to go by in order to comprehend the narrative is whatever Dowell says, he can therefore choose to omit certain facts and the reader would be none the wiser. Samuel Hynes explains this point well, saying
Can the reader gain the truth by trying to decipher and piece together Dowell's fragmented narration? Perhaps Ford is highlighting the futility in gaining 'truth' from a character's narration, especially when Dowell is presenting his version based on other characters' versions. Moser suggests that 'Dowell's chief purpose in telling the tale is not to understand it but to get it out of his head'. Hynes argues that the novel highlights the difficulties with such untrustworthy narration saying, '"How can we know what is true?" is itself what the novel is about.' Peter Brooks similarly says that Heart of Darkness
By raising these questions, and coming up with these innovative narrative techniques, Conrad and Ford have created a more realistic narrative vehicle with which to portray the process of thought and reflection. By rejecting omniscient third-person narrators in favour of intrusive first-person narrators, both writers have produced literary works that more realistically demonstrate the act of narration compared with literary realist equivalents.
Critics have suggested that the complex, digressive narrative style of The Good Soldier acts as a shock-absorbing tactic. Miriam Bailin, in her critical essay suggests that '... Dowell's indirect transmission of his story, his more general framing of all experience and emotion, and his continual digressions serve to displace, distance and ultimately disarm the force of the story.' Discussing the anti-linear narrative plot she says that the '...diffusion of plot may be life-like, but...it also provides a means of conveying disturbing or unresolved material in a shock-proof manner.' And discussing Dowell's struggle to narrate properly she offers the point, 'often Dowell's attempts to clarify the chronological sequence of his story provide... diversions from startling and painful events.' An example of Dowell diffusing the plot can be found at the end of the novel where he suddenly exclaims that he has forgotten to mention how Edward died, saying 'It suddenly occurs to me that I have forgotten to say how Edward met his death' (p.198). Instead of building up the plot to a climactic description of how Edward gruesomely committed suicide, Dowell casually mentions Edward's death, making the event seem insignificant due to the fact that it had almost not been drawn attention to.
At the beginning of part one, chapter two, Dowell struggles to find a suitable way to narrate his story saying,
He decides to imagine himself '...for a fortnight or so at one side of the fireplace of a country cottage, with a sympathetic soul opposite me' (p.19). Miriam Bailin suggests that
The metaphorical cottage gives Dowell a safe, comfortable setting where he can express and articulate his version of the painful story he has heard.
The anti-chronological narrative plot in Heart of Darkness has also been described as a shock-absorbing tactic that allows Marlow to articulate an otherwise anarchic tale. Albert J. Guerard suggests that
Conrad uses literary impressionism in Heart of Darkness as an innovative technique to try and capture the essence of the moment during Marlow's reflective process. Conrad was a believer in the impressionist style, discussing the task of the artist he argues that
Conrad goes on to say that 'my task which I am trying to achieve is, by the power of the written word to make you hear, to make you feel - it is, before all, to make you see'. An example of literary impressionism in Heart of Darkness is Marlow's description of the tribal attack of the steamboat. Describing the boat being hit by arrows he says
Marlow's reflective description here is a great example of how the Impressionist style captures the raw moment. The passage really involves the senses; visually - 'little sticks, flying about'; acoustically - 'whizzing'; physically - 'striking behind me'. Marlow's bewilderment in the chaos is expressed well too, he only visualises 'little sticks' at first, and only after reflection realises the significance of the sticks - that they are arrows and that he is being shot at. Ian Watt clarifies this point well saying,
This passage is also a good example of 'Progression d'effet', another literary style utilised and described by Conrad as a work that '...carries its justification in every line'.
Whether The Good Soldier is an impressionistic text is contentious, Thomas Moser believes it is saying that '... Dowell recalls Marlow in his propensity to talk about how difficult it is to fulfil their common purpose to make the reader see and about how hard the impressionistic method really is.' Hood on the other hand suggests that the novel has '...moved beyond literary impression, as the fundamental reality'. Literary impressionism can however still be identified in the novel, Dowell's description of the countryside is a good example,
Miriam Bailin identifies literary impressionism in this passage saying, 'With its minute attention to perspective, to diversity of colour and to shades of light, the picture he paints is very like an Impressionist canvas'.
In Marlow and Dowell we have two narrators that pose '...in an exemplary way central questions about the shape and epistemology of narrative'. As Peter Brooks suggests, the reader 'needs to read Heart of Darkness as an act of narration even more than as narrative or as story', the same can be applied to The Good Soldier as well. The elusive nature of Ford described by Rebecca West as a "scholar gipsy" can be seen in the character of Dowell, '...recognised only as he disappears round the corner'. Both Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier are far from being 'easy reads', their plots are better compared to as a 'hall of mirrors'. Both authors adopt traditionally realist narrative structures but subvert their traditional function. Ford and Conrad question the uncertainty of truth, the attainment of knowledge, and the futility of narration itself in their complex, non-linear plots. Instead they utilise innovative techniques to more realistically demonstrate the reflective thought process and the act of narration. Dowell's digression and inability to narrate properly act as displacement tactics that blunt the force of the painful events he describes. The dark tales that trouble Dowell and Marlow in Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier are made stable by being put into formal narrative structures. The Good Soldier adopts a Vorticist outlook described by Robert Greene as '...anarchy, fission and incest within a rigid formal structure'. Since much of the content in Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier reflects similar events in the biographies of Conrad and Ford, perhaps both authors found they needed a stable formal narrative structure in order to express the turmoil they had experienced. Miriam Bailin thinks this so in the case of Ford, saying
In his critical work Ulysses, Order, and Myth T.S. Eliot compliments Joyce's adaptation of the novel (Ulysses), describing how it offered '...a way of controlling, of ordering, of giving shape and a significance to the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is contemporary history.'
 Heart of Darkness and  The Good Soldier, like Ulysses, are great examples of how the adaptation of realist narrative forms allow the authors to give order and articulation to the experience of modern life.