A Midsummer Night's Dream and Plato's Republic present dramatically differing views on the nature of truth. Plato's conception of truth runs in line with his metaphysics of The Theory of Forms, in which the objects of the sensory world we inhabit are mere shadows of their ideal form in the absolute realm. He sees poetry as a third degree copy of this absolute truth and so as an obstacle to enlightenment, and ultimately he denies it entry into the ideal state. In contrast to this essentialistic view, A Midsummer Night's Dream offers a more fluid definition of truth. Shakespeare attaches great significance to 'artificial theatricality' which acts as a metaphor for the eternally thwarted search for truth. Set out in the play is the Renaissance Neo Platonic commonplace of 'Harmonia est Discordia Concours', in which the world's creative force is set out in the union of apparent opposites, love and strife etc and without this union, the world would not exist. In the play, this conflict is developed into a discourse which touches upon both the nature of truth itself and the relationship between dramatic structure and the expression of truth. The rigidity of Aristotelian conception of drama is seen as restrictive of a play's ability to express identity which is shown as shifting and elusive. It is telling that the world turned upside down by the chaos of the night's events is the 'court of Athens'. The vigorous force of life with all of its contradictions and vagaries is posed against the equilibrium of the grave seen both in rigid dramatic structure and absolute views of truth.
Plato's Republic emphasises the limitation of this gulf between poetry and reality. Poetic mimesis for him is only able to offer a 2 nd order copy of the ideal form and so is a threat to the search for truth. In the Greek aristocratic educational system, HomerThe difference between a poetic character and the poet himself disturbs Plato profoundly. He realises that this entails that identity is susceptible to impersonation and so is not fixed. In mimesis, there is no way of subjecting a poetic character to scientific verification, its truth is unavailable to an external obsever and thus the search for truth. This concern with the implications mimesis has for the search for truth stems from Plato's hierarchical conception of society. In his ideal state, roles were distributed so that each person had only one task, a hierarchy which flowed down from the philosopher King at the top through the ranks of statespeople and artisans down to labourers. The actor, for him violates this unity due to their ability to don different masks and identities, dressing one moment as a king and the next as a beggar, violating this structure.
Plato also objects in book III of the Republic to poetry's ability to stir up people's emotions distracting them from what is good and true. This stimulation of the emotions also represents the undermining of personal autonomy; poetry is a dangerous force which takes our sentiments prisoner. This concept of lack of autonomy is suggestive of Plato's fear that poetic artifice is able to subvert essentialist views on identity and ultimately of a fixed conception of truth. He suggests that a 'proper education' will enable someone to see when something is inelegant and will be offended by it. Poetry's value in using harmony, language and rhythm well all depend on its depiction of good charcters, in contrast to Shakespeare's association of the 'lunatic, the lover and the poet'. The poet is impelled, Plato believes to imbue his characters with 'grace, elegance' and goodness. Attacking many of the characters of the Odessey, he asserts that poetry must only show honourable qualities in its characters, depictions of 'luxuriosness' and dishonesty will have a bad influence on his audience. Notably, with reference to Shakespeare, poetry depicting eminent people laughing is also not permitted by Plato, perhaps due to laughter's ability to subvert order and hierarchy. He suggests that a work of art's beauty lies in its being loveable. However, excessive pleasure is incompatible with other virtues. Authentic love of knowledge is disciplined love of things that are restrained and attractive, thus poetry's ability to produce emotions in people is detrimental to the search for truth.
Plato's most probing attack on poetry comes in Book X of the republic. He argues that the divine created the ideal forms of everything on earth. Artisans are able to produce a first order copy as they produce something ressembling the form in type. Poets however, are mere representors of others' creations. Theit work is two generations from reality or truth. For him they do not represent things as how they truly are but only how they appear. The poet's understanding of reality is nothing but artifice. If a poet was capable of producing both originals and representation, they would only produce originals so for him they are inferior in skill to the artisan in terms of adherance to truth. They have no actual knowledge of truth, only representative skill. Again referring to Homer, Plato suggests that whilst he is held up as an authority on war, politics, tactics, law etc in Greek education there are no communities which claim him as a reformer of their legal system. Homer did not have hoards of followers and his pupil, Creophylus disreguarded him. This suggests to Plato that Homer had no educational skill or ability to instruct so therefore his poetry is not conducive to enlightenment. Plato also accuses poets of appealing to what the ignorant masses want to hear rather than what is true. He believes that the human mind has the tendency for confusion, such as thinking a stick is bent in water etc. For him, 'illusory art' targets this affliction. The way of addressing this affiction for Plato is reason and what woud now be called empirical observation, measuring etc. Plato asserts, therefore that the 'best' part of a person's psyche is reason, thus poetry addresses the part of the mind which is inferior. The calm reasonable side of the mind is less popular with theatre audiences who cannot understand it. Thus, the poet's creations fall short of truth by appealing to the petulant emotional side of the mind and destroy the rational side by allowing the other to dominate. This for him is the equivalent of destroying a civilised society and allowing the ruffians to rule. If the muse of epic poetry were allowed to rule his ideal state, in place of rule and reason, pleasure and pain would rule.
The action of A Midsummer Night's Dream, in contrast, is made intricate by the use of various levels of analogy, making more complex the concept of truth in poetry. The different groups of characters appear to be from different genres, suggesting a hierarchy of poetic reality, with the cosmic wisdom of the realm of the fairies at the top. Theseus and Hippolyta ressemble characters of the epic tradition whose relationship had emerged from the chaos of war to the concord of marriage; Theseus 'wooed' Hippolyta with his sword but he will 'wed thee in another key'. The metaphor of musical 'key' used to evoke their newly found harmony. The lovers, Hermia, Lysander, Helena and Demitrius in contrast, seem more like characters of the Greek Romances of writers such as Xenophon. Finally at the base level of experience we have 'Bottom' and the mechanicals who function on the level of farce. Despite Peter Quince's best efforts to direct the proceedings, Bottom shatters the harmony with his desire to play every part, 'And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too'. He is unwilling to be content in his place or accept the constraints of the dramatic structure of the play within a play. This produces numerous layers of mimetic alteration, and hints at the ability of theatre to question essentialist notions of a fixed human identity. The levels of experience presented in the play challenge Plato's of one objective truth as each set of characters' world is equally real with none offering us the final view on the matter. This suggests that poetry has the ability to produce a multiplicity of realities through use of language itself.
Also significant to an exploration of truth in the play is the role of imagination seen in one of Theseus' speech. Though sceptical of the value of poets, Theseus' criticism is not forceful. He has sympathy with the young lovers whom he views as 'fortunately met'. Imagination for him 'bodies forth the forms of things unknown', the use of the word 'forms having heightened significance with reference to Plato. However, the poet's pen is able to 'turn them to shapes' and 'give to airy nothing/ A local habitation and a name'. The imagination creates a discord of shapes which the poet is able to reconcile and give identity to. For Hippolyta, the story of the night's revelries adds up to more, growing 'to something of great contstancy/But howsoever, strange and admirable'. This implies that poetic creation creates a reality in itself with its own internal logic. The play may then be seen as concerning poetry and its role in the discovery of truth. The best creations of poetry are described as being 'but shadows' whilst 'the worst are no worse if imagination amend them'. This use of the metaphor of shadows could be seen as a reference to Plato's cave although it appears that Shakespeare is cunningly suggesting that ultimately the shadows are the only thing available to human investigation. Theseus emphasises the power as well as the limitations of art and imagination.
Another important element in the play's exploration of truth is the mechanicals' play within a play, which is for Schlegel 'an acute commentary on the nature of dramatic illusion' (qtd in Leon Guilhamet). The humorous deaths of Pyramus and Thisbe counters the effects of more serious threats in the play which could have culminated to produce a tragedy had Shakespeare's intentions been different. The play within a play could be seen as a parody of contemporary tragedy with its high born characters and attempts to conform to classical form. Instead however, the emotions of tragedy are banished from the play through ridicule. In opposition to the stillness and concord of death we have the discord of human experience and laughter. Shakespeare implies that life itself is inherantly contradictory and incomplete as humans are fragile non-absolute creatures but that this state of ignorance is something to be celebrated rather than struggled against. The reference to death seen within the mechanicals' play could also be a further challenge to Platonic metaphysics. Plato believed that in death, a person's immortal soul travelled to the realm of forms in which it gained absolute knowledge. In countering the sombre tone of tragedy with laughter, Shakespeare asserts the superiority of incomplete human existence over Platonic reverence to death and the subsequent Classical love of tragedy.
The play's use of dreams also serves an important function its exploration of truth. All characters share in a transcendent dream in which they cannot distinguish between waking and sleeping. Like dreams plays can be seen as having a surface level, behind which lurks their latent meaning. Demetrius questions 'Are you sure/That we are awake?/It seems to me/That yet we sleep, we dream'. The irony of this phenomenon in the play is that there are very few actual dreams, the characters rather reject the validity of the sensory experience through attributing it to dreams. This skepticism is reflective of the views of another Renaissance figure, Descartes' and his project of doubt, an attempt to find truth. However, his groundbreaking discovery was that there is no answer to a skeptical challenge as to the existence of the external world. All Descartes' thinker can be certain of is his own existence, shifting the focus of truth from Classical absolutism to the human centred Renaissance view. This therefore gives the poet's reality more validity as they create through the centre of their own thoughts, the only thing which cannot be doubted. This link between dreams and truth is further displayed in Bottom's dream of which it is 'past the wit of man to say what dream it was'. The dream is reminiscent of St.Paul's promise, as Bottom recounts comically 'That eye of man hath not heard , the ear of man hath not seen'. The profundity of Bottom's dream echoes the wisdom of divine order of St.Paul's original, suggesting that the suspension of the waking reality in dreams provides a link to higher knowledge. Shakespeare however puts this widom not in a high born character but in the mouth of his fool, further undermining Classical rigidity. Just as Bottom's dream is an inadequate representation of Paul's promise, so the imaginative conception of the play as a whole is an inadequate mirroring of divine order. However, Shakespeare implies that this parabolic representation is as close as humankind can get to truth, which is ultimately out of reach. This eternal struggle is wryly mocked, 'What fools these mortals be'.
In conclusion, The Republic and A Midsummer Night's Dream present radically differing conceptions of truth. The former offers a truth which is out there in objective reality to be discovered, a truth that is unchanging and independent of human perception. Poetry is detrimental to the discovery of this truth as it subverts the constancy of human identity, stirs up the emotions undermining personal autonomy, and is able only to offer a second order copy of the absolute form. The latter, however, presents us with a truth that shifts from one person's perspective to another's. It is ambiguous whether Shakespeare actually believes in an objective truth but he certainly suggests that acquisition of such knowledge is beyond mortal grasp. Celebrated instead we find the full vigour of human life with all of its incompleteness and contradictions pulling against each other. At the close of Book X Plato observes that if poetry was to answer his criticisms in poetic form he would have no answer, the fact that his Dialogues themselves involve mimesis offers a telling fulfillment of this.