In this essay I will be discussing the way in which time is used in the genres of Drama and the Novel. In particular I will be focussing on The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610) and Emma (Austen, 1816), and will look at ways in which time is used in these texts.
Novels have been described as 'long narratives in prose dealing chiefly with contemporary life'. These long narratives generally consist of a detailed plot and storyline, this detail creates a fictional world in which the reader can enter and explore into. Novels are designed for private reading, during this time the reader interacts with the characters and internalises the scene and setting. This fictional world becomes more realistic for the reader when a sense of time is added. When the reader is put into a time-specific moment in a novel, the moment reads with a more realistic feeling. The moment becomes more intimate with the reader, and, by sounding more realistic, the time-specific moment draws the reader into the text more than if time had not been added. This enables the reader to internalise the story more. An example of a time-specific moment in a novel is:
This extract contains a lot of modifiers e.g. 'bright', 'cold', 'vile', making the text very descriptive. This description sets the scene allowing the reader's imagination to run wild, in doing so the text becomes more realistic and the text is internalised.
Dramas are usually time-restricted (e.g. duration of two hours); this means there is less time to put in such detail through oral methods. This makes sense, as dramas are fundamentally visual spectacles, time however can be portrayed through the use of background features (e.g. a sunset painted on a canvas), or through the use of a narrator. In The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610), a narrator personifying time is quickly and visually used to describe a shift in time of sixteen years. The use of such an unrealistic character is a feature of the fantasy-like subject matter apparent in romantic dramas. The character of Time plays an important role in providing a visually dramatic, effective way of engaging the audience and preparing them for the sudden skip in time. It helps bridge the gap between the tragic start and the comedy-like conclusion, and also aids in speeding up the duration of the drama.
Time adds structure to a novel, Ian Watt (1957) wrote that:
The plot in Emma (Austen, 1816) follows a linear chronological order, events moving in time systematically, present situations arising from previous situations. Examples of this are the relationships between characters, specifically those that lead to eventual marriage (e.g. Emma and Mr. Knightly). As the novel unfolds, the interactions between the characters are presented in a linear chronological order, so the reader is able to keep track of what stage the relationship is at.
The use of time differs in The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610), the plot does not unfold in such a linear fashion, and in some situations a reversal of time is used. An example of this is Hermione's apparent death and resurrection. When the statue of Hermione miraculously transforms into the real Hermione, the law of time has been broken. In reality death is the ending factor of life, this does not apply in The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610), so in comparison with Emma (Austen, 1816) the plot is therefore less plausible.
However, since The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610) is a romantic drama the subject content doesn't have to be plausible, the reversal of time allows a supernatural event to happen, this is a common feature in this kind of drama. Emma (Austen, 1816), as a novel on the other hand, aims to portray realistic contemporary fiction, this means that time needs to act in a realistic way to achieve a plausible plot.
Time is important for character development in the Novel. Ian Watt (1957) said that, 'characters of the novel can only be individualised if they are set in a background of particularised time and place." Due to the length of narrative in a novel, the reader is given a lot of description regarding the personalities of the main characters. In Emma (Austen, 1816), this intimacy with characters is further enhanced by the inclusion of Emma's thoughts throughout the story. The reader witnesses the development of Emma's personality; as the text unfolds she becomes more mature and eventually recognises her own faults in personality. At the start of the novel, the reader learns that Emma intends never to be married, however, as the plot unfolds, her thoughts change and she ends up getting married. Time has allowed the reader to follow the events that led to Emma's change of view regarding marriage. A change in personality is often gradual; therefore, if the novel did not stretch across a length of time this development would not be possible.
However, since The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610) is a drama, the audience is unable to get to know the personality of characters as deeply as they do in Emma (Austen, 1816). Dramas have less time to give detailed character description; this is because they have to conform to a certain time period. Compared with the long narrative of the novel, dramas have less time in which to show the gradual development of a character. The character of Perdita is an exaggerated example of this in The Winter's Tale (Shakespeare, 1610). The audience is unable to observe the development of Perdita's character as sixteen years of her life have been skipped. The audience view the abandoning of Perdita, and also learn that a Shepherd decides to take care of her and bring her up as his own. However, shortly after this scene, the personification of Time reveals a jump in time. This creates problems for the audience understanding the character of Perdita. Due to this lack of description and detail of character Perdita is unfamiliar, so the audience is unable to make personal judgements of her character based on her history.
In Emma (Austen, 1816), the amount of time characters spend together during a visit is a good indication as to how important they are socially. In general, the longer the visit, the more socially important the visitor deems the host to be. An example of this is when Emma advises Harriet to visit the Martins for only a short period of time to show that Harriet is not interested in any further formal acquaintance. By shortening her visit, Harriet is indirectly telling the Martins that previous interest and respect has been lost, and that she regards herself socially higher than the Martins. Therefore, the amount of time spent during visits between the characters in Emma (Austen, 1816) gives an indication towards social importance and the strength of a relationship regarding respect and credibility.
Seasonal change in The Winter's Tale marks the dramatic change from tragedy to comedy. When Perdita is abandoned, it is wintertime in Bohemia, the weather is cold and reflects the sad events regarding Antigonus' death, the wrecking of his ship, and of course, the abandoning of the baby. However, after Time mentions that sixteen years have passed, the audience learns from Autolycus' song that spring has arrived 'When daffodils begin to peer'. This merry song marks the end of sad events and prepares the audience for the happy conclusion of the drama. The inclusion of seasons sets the scene for the events that occur, since the audience has preconceptions of spring being a time of new life and happiness, and winter being a time of frozenness, coldness and possibly unhappiness.
In conclusion it is seen that time adds structure to a novel, conventionally, it is a factor that remains stable and constant. In comparison, dramas often use time in less conventional methods; this can make the plot more fantastic and dramatic. Due to the length of a novel, a lot of description can be conveyed to the reader. This allows the reader to internalise the characters and environment more intimately, which leads to a better understanding of the novel. Dramas, on the other hand, have to conform to a certain time period, therefore more visual representations have to be utilised. Examples of this are; seasonal changes and the preconceptions these seasons carry; and through other methods such as the personification of time as a narrator. In novels, time is important for the development of character personality, it can also highlight the social importance of characters. Time is an important factor in both drama and the novel, the plots in both genres need to progress towards a conclusion, and time is invaluable in providing this progression.