Sitcoms (Situational Comedies) often play with the normal codes of cooperation between people in a conversation. The way every script is constructed is carefully analysed and discussed by the writers in order to create the expected humour effect. They might not know but one of the principles that they use to achieve this is the Pragmatics one. According to Cutting (2002), Pragmatics takes a socio-cultural perspective on language usage and studies its context, text and function. Therefore, this essay will provide a pragmatic analysis on one of the scripts taken from the American sitcom Friends. First, a short introduction to the Sitcom and its characters will be presented. Then Grice's conversational maxims of the Cooperative Principle, Brown and Levinson's Politeness theory and Leech's Politeness Maxims will be summarized and then illustrated throughout the text analysis. Finally, a conclusion will be drawn on the effectiveness of these frameworks to understand the text chosen and on the peculiarities discovered about the humour used in Friends.
As described by Nash (1985), 'humour is a specifying characteristic of humanity'. And although the sense of humour varies in different cultures, it seems to have some similarities that enabled Friends to be a huge success around the world. The sitcom involves the everyday life of six friends showing an exaggeration of real life situations. The characters themselves have distinct characteristics that help us to understand their ways of expression and reaction during the conversations. The chosen script is a scene from the tenth season of the series where five of the main characters - Rachel, Joey, Monica, Chandler and Phoebe - interact in their favourite coffee shop. Rachel is the 'fashion woman' and just had a baby with Ross (the character missing from the scene) called Emma. Joey is an actor and is very 'airhead'; he often takes a lot of time to understand jokes and indirect speeches. We could even argue that he would have a really hard time to understand Pragmatics. Monica and Chandler are married. Monica is a chef and is very perfectionist. Chandler works in advertisement and is very sarcastic and ironic at times. He loves making jokes and fun of other people. Finally, Phoebe is similar to Joey in 'airheadness'. She is the crazy one in the group who always have strange hypotheses for everything and has very unexpected reactions like the one seen on lines 32/33 of the text. She is a masseuse and has been dating Mark for a year now.
A study on sitcom humour (Nunn 2005) suggested that 'humour can be derived from the deliberate scripting of flouted maxims'. These maxims are part of Grice's theory of the Cooperative Principle, cited in Yule (1996, p.145), which states as follows:
The four maxims - Quantity, Quality, Relevance or Relation, and Manner - were then proposed by Grice to support this theory. These can be observed, violated, opted out, infringed or flouted. In the text chosen, the maxims were: violated, the speaker generates an intentionally misleading implicature (Thomas 1995); infringed, the speaker fails to observe a maxim because of their imperfect linguistic performance (Cutting 2002); and most of the times flouted, the speaker don't follow the maxims but expect the hearers to understand the meaning implied (Cutting 2002). According to Cutting (2002), when a speaker flouts the maxim of quantity he or she gives to little or too much information. When flouting the maxim of quality the speaker say something that obviously doesn't represent what they think. Flouting the maxim of Relevance the speaker expects the hearer to imagine what the utterance did not say, and make a connection between their utterance and the preceding one. And when flouting the maxim of manner, the speaker seems to be obscure or ambiguous.
Brown and Levinson's Politeness theory is another aspect relevant to this analysis. In the text we will see examples of off record, on record baldly, on record with positive politeness and on record with negative face politeness. In comedy the use of off record politeness is very common. This, according to Brown and Levinson (1978), is when the speaker is essentially being indirect in order to avoid responsibility. The more direct way of suggesting, offering, requesting or inviting is called a bald on record politeness. Also direct but trying to save positive face - the need to be liked and accepted by others, treated as a member of the group (Cutting 2002) - is the on record with positive politeness. Finally, when the speaker is direct but trying to save negative face - the need to be independent and not be imposed on by others (Cutting 2002) - he or she is doing a on record with negative politeness.
It will also be considered for this analysis the politeness maxims proposed by Leech. As seen in Cruse (2004), there are 6 types of politeness maxims: tact, generosity, praise, modesty, agreement and sympathy. The ones observed and flouted in this analysis are, as described in Cruse (2004):
The conversation starts with Rachel making a comment about letting her baby, Emma, have her first cookie. This is then followed by Joey flouting the maxim of quality by exaggerating his statement in line 3 with the use of a hyperbole - 'all the time'. What he intends to say is not that she eats cookies all the time but that it is certainly not the first. Because of this statement Joey puts himself in a very occurred situation where people can assume that he has given cookies to Emma before. Rachel's reaction is of a baldly on record face threatening act with a direct question to Joey in line 4. She violates the politeness maxim of tact by not being cautious, and leaves Joey no other choice but to violate the maxim of quality by not answering with the truth. In order to create a stronger comic effect he flouts the maxim of relevance and quality when saying that he also never gave her a frosting from a can.
On line 7 a new interaction starts between Monica, Rachel, Chandler and Joey. First, Monica uses on record negative politeness to minimize imposition on Rachel when asking her to write the letter to the adoption company. She gives Rachel the option to refuse it by inserting in her question an intentionally noncommittal statement: 'we were wondering'. Rachel being best friends with Monica surely doesn't refuse the request and accepts it flouting the maxim of quantity; adding more then a simply 'yes' to her answer in line 10.
The whole situation upsets Joey who, on line 14, tries to catch everybody's attention by clearing his throat and consequently flouting the maxim of relevance and manner by saying that it has been an oversight. He produces an off record face threatening act giving a hint that he feels left out of their decision. The hearers, Monica and Chandler, can opt to comment on it or not. And so Chandler do it on lines 15 and 16 trying to save Joey's positive face when saying 'we would've asked you', and his negative face by 'we thought you wouldn't be interested'. Monica's reply is less tact than Chandler's though, probably because Chandler is Joey's best friend. In lines 17 and 18 she wants to give him some sympathy but she slightly insults him by saying he is not much "with the words". Either way, they are both flouting the maxim of quality because knowing Joey we can deduce that they didn't really thought of asking him after all. Joey then infringes - 'his performance is impaired by nervousness' as defined in Cutting (2002) - the maxim of quantity by not giving any information but just babbling along. He doesn't really know what to say, what provokes Monica to flout the maxim of quality by being sarcastic on line 20. She means the complete opposite of what she says.
Joey continues to try convincing Monica and Chandler that he could write the letter. He flouts the maxim of quantity by giving more information than it is necessary (lines 21 to 23) to make his point. He also appeals to their positive face showing sympathy, claiming common ground and applying the politeness maxim of generosity. This generates Monica response of saying that they want him to do it. She doesn't need any politeness strategy here since Joey wants to write the letter and then there's no need of asking but just directly saying it.
The seriousness is then broken by his open thoughts of how he is going to start the letter (lines 25 and 26). Chandler realizes their mistake of letting Joey write the letter and flouts the maxim of quality by being sarcastic in line 27. He is not at all excited because Joey just showed that he can be really bad 'with the words'.
A new interaction is introduced with Phoebe arriving and saying 'hello' in line 29. Everybody answers back and Joey repeats his 'hello' implying something more to it and therefore flouting the maxim of quantity. He probably noticed that Phoebe is looking better dressed than usual. This is followed by Monica's remark to Phoebe's look on line 32. She is being indirect, and flouting the maxim of quantity and manner by not asking what she really wants to know. She both implies 'where are you going all nice' or 'why are you dressed all nice', and leaves Phoebe to interpret it and to answer if she wants. By this indirect action she is being polite off record also applying the politeness maxim of praise. Subsequently, Phoebe completely violates the politeness maxim of modesty by agreeing that she looks nice. However, this is expected of Phoebe and is what gives the humour to the passage. She also opts to answer Monica's implication making the statement that it is Mike's and her anniversary. It could be argued that Phoebe flouted the maxim of quantity since her statement invited questions to be made. First, Rachel asks a very direct question on line 34 that leaves Phoebe no choice but to answer it. This baldly on record question is followed by options to what the anniversary could be of. Phoebe then answers it with a simple 'yeah', not specifying which anniversary and so flouting the maxim of manner. We can assume she says 'yeah' for everything or just for the last part - 'first time you had sex'. Next it is Chandler's time to ask the question on line 37 deducing that Phoebe and Mike are going somewhere fancy to celebrate. He uses an off record politeness by flouting the maxim of manner. His intentions are to know where Phoebe and Mark are going but he only implies it so Phoebe can choose to answer 'yes' or 'no', or the name of the place they are going. She then flouts the maxim of quality when she says 'yes' to going to a fancy place and them ironically adding that the place is a basketball game, which is not fancy at all. Realizing that, Joey makes a direct - bald on record - question to Phoebe insinuating that she is not properly dressed for it. She understands the hint and consequently flouts the maxim of quantity by giving more information than necessary in order to her friends stop judging her. She also flouts the maxim of relevance when she highlights on line 43 that they are going to have sex in a public restroom. Monica then makes use of an on record positive politeness questioning Phoebe, on line 44, about having sex in the public restroom. She is very direct but makes a remark after the question that shares something about herself and Chandler, assuring Phoebe of their friendship and that is it alright to talk about it. To end the scene, Chandler tries to defend himself from the accusation that he doesn't even want to have sex in their bathroom. In order to do that he flouts the maxim of quality using a euphemism - saying 'number two' for defecating.
Through this type of analysis one can come to the conclusion that the frameworks used were significantly effective to help comprehending the humour in the script. A constant flout of the maxims can be seen, specially the quantity and quality ones which create the typical comedy effect desired. It becomes clear that the sense of humour used in Friends is common among different cultures because of these basic principles of cooperation and politeness.