Gothic romance fiction pivots around a central female character, classic Hollywood turned to the Gothic providing a genre in which women's anxieties and preoccupations, and different social concerns, were represented. The use and portrayal of women's subjectivity is an essential feature to be studied in relation to Gothic films. I intend to examine these aspects to explore why the Gothic privileges women's experience and analyses of Rebecca and Dragonwyck will illustrate my argument.
Gothic stories share a series of recurring elements, there is the heroine; the male protagonist she is attracted to; their opposites, another man and woman; the house where the story is set, and finally a secret which the heroine encounters.
The female protagonist is a young, innocent and shy girl, such as the heroine in Rebecca or Miranda in Dragonwyck. The narrative focus of Gothic stories lies on this figure who is both the victim and the investigator of a mystery. Even though the heroine is caged in a threatening environment, she does not undertake an active strategy, her shy and submissive characters refrains her. Her sense of curiosity is alert but she lacks an assertive investigative attitude.
The difference can be seen more clearly comparing a Film noir heroine to a Gothic one. In Dragonwyck, Miranda puts up with Nicholas's rejection when they lose their son. She endures the solitude for weeks until she dares confront him in the tower room. Also, as regards physical passivity, when Nicholas attacks Doctor Turner after hearing his accusations of murder, Miranda simply looks on and remains immobile.
The secretary in Phantom Lady, on the contrary, is an active character. Kansas decides to do whatever is in her hands to help the male protagonist, Scott, and prove him innocent of his wife's murder. She looks for the mysterious woman who can give Scott an alibi, even dressing up and going out with strangers, something that would be very daring for an innocent Gothic heroine.
There is one clear female protagonist in Gothic romances and the spectator is inclined to identify with her. Her emotions and perceptions are emphasised through the use of mise-en-scne and subjective narration. The female carries the weight of the story and guides the spectator through the film.
The importance of the female protagonist also stands out through the male's reliance on her. Kim Wheatley explores this emotional dependency through what she calls the "spectacle of male dependence". In Rebecca, for example, Maxim relies on the heroine for help and support during the investigation for Rebecca's death. Also, during his confession speech to the heroine, Maxim exposes himself and, therefore, opens up emotionally as he tells her exactly how he felt for Rebecca.
This emphasises that the Gothic is a genre for women as the spectacle of male dependence is reassuring for them, as Wheatley argues. The fact that men emotionally depend on women and that their emotional fragility or sensitivity is conveyed can be encouraging. Also, as it can be seen in Rebecca, the patronising husband who never really externalises his love for his wife, turns out to need and love her.
The heroine is attracted to the male protagonist: an older, enigmatic and powerful man. Their relationship sustains the emotional weight of the film and reflects aspects of contemporary society, as regards family structure and control.
In Dragonwyck the male protagonist Nicholas is wealthy and has an influential role in society. He is older than Miranda and a controlling man in all ways; when they are travelling to Dragonwyck on the boat, Nicholas talks down to Miranda and orders her not to say "golly" but "beautiful" when speaking and Miranda complacently obeys. Also, when he asks for Miranda's hand, he decides they are going to get married straightaway, even though her father does not agree, Miranda's response is just "I'll do whatever Nicholas thinks best". The heroines are shadowed by the man's bold, patronising personality and attitude.
The heroines marry the protagonists without knowing too much about them and are attracted immediately. Miranda is captivated by Nicholas in Dragonwyck even before meeting him, she is fascinated by the idea of him being "terribly rich and elegant"; and the exchange of looks when they first meet in New York anticipates their relationship. Nicholas' mysterious character resonates from the start, especially through the use of mise-en-scne. Vincent Price's performance slowly gives clues to the spectator that he is hiding something, just like Laurence Olivier's does in Rebecca, with Maxim's sudden mood swings when anyone mentions water or Rebecca.
The main characters contrast with two other major figures in Gothic stories, the "other woman" and the "other man". Both characters are antitheses of the protagonists. The "shadow-male", as Joanna Russ names him, as opposed to the male protagonist, is gentle, calm and caring and may serve as a substitute for him, such as Doctor Turner in Dragonwyck . When Miranda is leaving after Nicholas' death, he says goodbye and asks her if he can call her. Dragonwyck ends, therefore, with an optimistic feeling now that the heroine finds a caring man to be with.
The figure of the "other woman" is clearly explained by looking at the character of Rebecca. Her image haunts the heroine throughout the film; Rebecca was sociable, popular and beautiful. In addition, Maxim finally talks to the heroine about her, and the spectator discovers she was aggressive, unfaithful and defiant. The "other woman" is regarded as a threat to the heroine as she has to compete with her, therefore, another anxiety. This leads on to another characteristic of the Gothic, the hidden secrets. The heroine always discovers a certain secret related to her husband: in Dragonwyck Nicholas turns out to be a murderer and in Rebecca, Maxim has covered up Rebecca's death. The emphasis on portraying contrasting characters in a mysterious entourage relates to women's anxieties such as the fear of the husband, of not being loved or of having chosen the wrong man.
Another crucial figure in the Gothic is the actual setting of the story. There is always a scary house where the protagonists live, Manderley and Dragonwyck epitomise this. The use of mise-en-scne in the opening scene of Rebecca creates a dreamy and sinister atmosphere thanks to the use of chiaroscuro which serves to present the house as a menacing place and introduce the story hinting at Manderley's tragic end. The protagonist's voice over adds to this as her tone changes throughout the speech and there are relevant pauses to build up the intrigue. The fact that it is a first person narration and the spectator does not know who is talking, also adds to the mystery.
During her adventure, the heroine also meets a young person or, on occasions, an animal. This figure is related to the husband and also the mystery. In Rebecca, the heroine has the dog Jasper which takes her to the boathouse and in Dragonwyck, Katrine is neglected by her parents, especially Nicholas, and provides the first clues about Nicholas' desire for a male heir.
The presence of homely fears in the Gothic is a fundamental aspect to appraise. In this genre, fear emerges from an interior anxiety as it is related to solitude, darkness and silence. This can be seen in Rebecca for instance, as the heroine dreads estrangement from her husband. Localising fear in the home enables the Gothic to consider anxieties facing women now that domesticity is a sphere traditionally related to them. Also, Gothic heroines tend to never leave home, they seldom carry out household jobs and this gives them time to worry about uncanny threats and husbands.
Freud's concept of the uncanny refers to fear related to the habitual, where what is familiar becomes unfamiliar and torments us. Domestic figures become intimidating and haunting. In Rebecca, Maxim's bizarre behaviour confuses the heroine and in Dragonwyck, Nicholas becomes a threat to Miranda. The domestic environment is unsettling and menacing, Miranda in Dragonwyck believes that the mansion is her dream, it symbolises wealth, power and a life of happiness away from the farm but turns out to be the opposite.
Gothic heroines are insecure at home at one of the reasons is because they are not in control of their own premises. There are two main spaces in a household, the public and private areas. The Gothic heroine feels so threatened, that her private sphere is also in jeopardy. In Rebecca, the heroine is not even safe when she is in the space reserved for her such as bedrooms or the Morning room, now that Mrs. Danvers, part of the service, has access to her private sphere and Rebecca is omnipresent. This is most clearly appreciated in Dragonwyck as Nicholas' first wife Johanna is actually poisoned in bed.
The uncanny elements in the stories can lead the protagonists to paranoia, they are unsettling for the protagonist and undermine her confidence. This is evident in Rebecca as the heroine's continuous efforts to reach Maxim are in vain and cause her to break down. The heroine tries to confront Mrs. Danvers when she is rejected by Maxim at the ball but ends up collapsing in front of her and considering suicide. She is convinced Mrs. Danvers is determined to drive her away from Manderley and Maxim.
The Gothic heroine believes she is victim of a plot. In Dragonwyck this proves to be true as Nicholas wants to poison Miranda but in Rebecca, Mrs. Danvers is actually also seeking Maxim's destruction and not the heroine's. Mrs. Danvers looks at the heroine suspiciously and judges her movements. When the heroine tells Maxim that she accidentally broke the china figure in the Morning room and he wants her to tell Mrs. Danvers and Frith, she begs Maxim to do so himself because she fears Mrs. Danvers.
The Gothic heroines become paranoid with what they know and do not know. The protagonist obsesses with the situation and with the fact someone is after them. The heroine in Rebecca is self-conscious and her efforts are focused on being worthy of Maxim because she believes Maxim and his entourage are judging her. The heroine tends to be a "'stand-in' for someone else" and which deepens her anxiety and paranoia.
Besides the disturbing presence of Mrs. Danvers in the film, the use of motifs - another element of mise-en-scne-, like the repetition of Rebecca's initials, also adds to the heroine's paranoia. Repetition is, in Freud's study, an element of the uncanny as is doubling, a major theme in the Gothic. Many characters and situations are doubled causing anxiety and symbolising menace. Past experiences and events haunt the characters' present and surface certain preoccupations. Freud related doubling to the uncanny now that reliving past events is so. This echoes the fact the heroine is a "stand-in"; doubling is evident in Dragonwyck as Miranda is Nicholas' second wife and he plans on murdering her just like he killed Johanna.
In the light of a Freudian interpretation, the inclusion of paranoia and other personality afflictions surface unconscious anxieties, which leads on to sexuality in the Gothic. The Production Code prohibited explicit sex but mise-en-scne gives films a large scope for subtle visual imagery and can spur many interpretations. The figure of the "other woman" is also a medium of expressing sexuality now that she represents the latter and, also, immorality. The seductive and sensual women in the Gothic are normally punished for their outward behaviour, Rebecca, for instance, tortures Maxim with her love affairs and ends up dead. Gothic heroines, on the contrary, are virtuous even though they may even portray sexual anxieties. With reference to a later film, when Kit in Midnight Lace (who has not consummated her marriage) breaks down in the lift believing her life is at threat, her hysterical outbreak and rescue by the "shadow male" of the film, connotes a sexual encounter.
Not only do suspense and paranoia overlap in Gothic films, but also terror and horror. Fred Botting differentiates them explaining that terror focuses on fear appealing to emotion and imagination while horror causes confusion and paralysis and is coupled with death. Women's Gothic films privilege the former over the latter. I believe concentrating on the psychological side of fear can be seen as an attempt to appeal to the feminine conscience and attitude. Internalised fear causes anxiety and Gothic heroines do not externalise their fears, therefore, the Gothic offers a genre through which to channel women's anxieties.
One of the main characteristics of the Gothic is the importance of passion and extreme emotions. Traditionally, masculinity has been related to coldness and rationality while femininity and women are linked to sentimentality and emotion. A masculine style is expected to be less passionate than a woman's and Gothic films and stories stand out for their passion-driven plots.
The narrative structure of Classical Hollywood Cinema has a cause-effect chain of events that arises from the actions of the protagonist, thus in Gothic films, the development of the action is a consequence of the heroine's actions (or reactions). In Classical Hollywood Cinema, the desire of the protagonist is the catalyst for the story, therefore, Gothic films depend on their heroines and besides their active or passive nature, clearly the plots revolve around women.
In Rebecca, the heroine's reactions, regards the situations around her, shape the story. The unnamed heroine's desire is to be loved. She constantly strives to impress Maxim and win his affection, such as when she chooses her costume for the fancy dress ball. At the end of the film, the heroine is relieved to find out the truth about Rebecca's death because rather than uncovering the truth, she finally discovers how Maxim felt about Rebecca.
This desire is also conveyed in Dragonwyck when Miranda tells Nicholas she is pregnant. Miranda is upset because she has been arguing with Nicholas and when she breaks the news she asks, "Have I done something to please you at last?", clearly showing her distress at the thought of not contenting her husband. Also, after their son's death, Nicholas spends more time alone in the tower room. Miranda's curiosity leads her up the stairs to see what he is doing there. She asks him to confide in her and share his unhappiness and problems and "be a part of you", desperately seeking a connection with her husband.
A similar pattern in the narrative can be drawn from Dragonwyck. The chain of events more prominently arises from Nicholas' desires as he longs for a male heir and poisons his first wife and attempts to murder Miranda because they cannot give him the son he wants. However, in this case the female protagonist's desire can also be considered the catalyst for the story. Miranda seeks to get away from home, as she tells her family at the start of the film when they receive Nicholas' request for a companion for Katrine; her arrival at Dragonwyck and resulting relationship with Nicholas set off the story.
Gothic films introduce the issue of female subjectivity. Their stories are about women so it is mandatory to consider feminine point of view. Spectators experience the heroine's perception and interpretation of events. In Rebecca, the spectator accompanies the heroine throughout the whole film with a small exception at the end when the men travel to London. It is the heroine's story one lives and her anxieties and fears one encounters.
Films can use subjective narration in various forms such as point-of-view shots, hallucinations or flashbacks, for example. Rebecca uses subjective camera and voice over at the beginning of the film. This introduces one to the story and the narrator herself, although the subjective point of view provided by the voice over is lost at the end of the film. This initial sequence is clearly subjective and the camera itself acquires the heroine's perspective as it glides through the gates of Manderley while the narrator introduces her flashback, hence, her story. It is the heroine who prepares the spectator for the film.
The suspense comes from what the heroine does or does not know. The spectator shares her knowledge and discovers the mystery with her as the film develops. One also assumes Maxim is distressed because he has lost his wife and not because he has covered up her death. It is not until the end of the film, with Maxim's confession to the heroine, that the spectator discovers the truth.
The image the spectator has of the other characters in the film is the same one the protagonist has, as they are defined according to how they interact with her. Maxim is presented as a patronising man; in one of the first scenes of Rebecca the heroine wants to go and play tennis but bumps into Maxim who snatches her racket and decides, for her, that they will go for a drive. Also, when Maxim takes the protagonist out he addresses her like she is a child, telling her to "blow your nose!" or "stop biting your nails!" The heroine is intimidated by her husband, even though she is in love with him, and the powerful image that subdues her is passed on to the spectator.
The representation of women on screen not only asks for a review of subjectivity and identification, but also of objectivation, contestation and recuperation. The visual style of a film can objectify women, making them appear as spectacles, consequently the spectator shares a male point of view when looking at women on screen. Borrowing an example from Written on the Wind, when Mitch meets Lucy, she is clearly objectified. Mitch walks into the office and just sees Lucy's legs, the camera offers a subjective shot and focuses on her legs to show what Mitch is looking at and convey sensuality before offering the spectator a larger shot of the protagonist. However, women do not have to be entirely confined to certain roles, contestation offers the chance for women to break away from social norms and restraints. Nevertheless, only to be redirected to their initial situation, hence, recuperation.
The camera objectifies Miranda throughout Dragonwyck especially thanks to the use of three-point lighting which accentuates her physique. After Johanna's death, Nicholas goes to Greenwich to ask for Miranda's hand. When she walks down the stairs to meet him, the low angle shot empowers her and the bright light glamorises her. Nicholas wants Miranda and the spectator is encouraged to share his point of view. As regards contestation and recuperation, Miranda rebels against social norms and expectations when she goes to Dragonwyck. She does not comply with her father's standards and insists on going away to discover a world beyond the farm. However, recuperation puts her back in her place now that due to her contestation, she suffers bad fate. Miranda goes back to her family when Johanna dies and ends up returning permanently to Greenwich after Nicholas' death.
The supernatural features, extreme emotions and suspense in the Gothic hint at escapism, however their contents display social realities. Women's desire for social freedom is presented for instance in Dragonwyck. The dream of not conforming to the role seizes Miranda from the beginning. The close-up of her face, enhanced by a bright light, intensifies the strength of her speech as she looks up and away from her father.
Gothic romance films were extremely popular during the 1940s, audiences were largely female so studios wanted films women would enjoy and relate to. Women faced a changing scenario where family structures, social norms and roles were evolving.
The fact that women were caught in a period of change explains why the Gothic could represent their preoccupations. The anxieties they were living are reflected on screen through the mysteries at home. Husbands and daily life could be regarded as elements of disquietude, homely fears and the uncanny come into action to trap Miranda in Dragonwyck's mystery, for example. It is interesting to highlight that there were many early marriages due to World War II; a note that brings the Gothic theme of enigmatic husbands to mind, as Diane Waldman points out.
Gothic films such as Rebecca reflect a patriarchal family where the male is in charge of the household. One of the recurrent figures is that of the "other man". Gothic characters represent social archetypes, in this case, the character represents the less authoritarian male: the alternative to patriarchy. Other fears relating to femininity are also common. Motherhood is a source of anxiety in Dragonwyck as Nicholas murders his wives because he cannot have a son and his ancestors suffered the same fate.
The Gothic brings women's concerns closer to cinema with the adaptation of women's point of view and the reflection of social reality through themes and motifs. Gothic films place women in the centre of their plots and women's issues are reflected through characters and relationships on screen. The Gothic heroine is the primal focus and the spectator is encouraged to align with her. The attempt to develop subjective narration and appeal to women's identification conveys how the Gothic offers a suitable genre to consider women's anxieties.