Dragonwyck is a classical Gothic film of the 1940s. Its narrative structure and visual style correspond with the characteristics of classical cinema. In this essay I will carry out a close textual analysis of the ball scene in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's film in relation to the theory of mise-en-scne and its adherence to the techniques of narration in Classical Hollywood Cinema.
The Van Ryn's celebrate a ball at Dragonwyck castle. Miranda is trying to fit in with everybody, she joins a group of young women to befriend them and blend in. However, they despise her for her roots and Miranda is left hurt and humiliated. Nicholas, who has witnessed the argument, comforts Miranda and invites her to dance.
Classical Hollywood Cinema has a linear narrative structure which holds to the pattern: equilibrium-disequilibrium-new equilibrium. Sequences and scenes are generally moulded like the whole film; this order is evident in the film Dragonwyck and also in this particular scene. The scene begins with Miranda walking through the ballroom observing what is around her and trying to find her place. After a brief encounter with a French man, Miranda advances into an adjacent room and sits with the young women there. Their conversation starts amicably but the women's superior attitude belittles and insults Miranda. The new equilibrium is reached when Nicholas comforts Miranda and flatters her, telling her how "beautiful" she looks and how she is so "much better" than the other girls, and finally dancing with her. Nicholas solves the situation and restores the equilibrium. This scene respects classical narrative conventions and, furthermore, epitomises the linear narrative structure of Classical Hollywood Cinema. The different parts of the narrative pattern can be clearly identified and differentiated.
The two protagonists of Dragonwyck are present during this scene and the main features of their personalities conveyed. The growing relationship between Miranda and Nicholas is apparent and the protagonists' interaction, and other characters' reactions, predicts their future. The way in which Nicholas saves Miranda and cheers her up proves his role as the Gothic male. His bold and domineering qualities stand out as he talks to Miranda and dances with her in front of the whole room.
Miranda is the heroine in Dragonwyck and is portrayed as young and innocent in this scene. Miranda's naivety takes her to sit with the group of women believing she can engage in casual conversation with them, she talks about Connecticut and tries to fit in but ends up hurt because she is not good enough. The way in which she withdraws proves her childishness as she storms out raising her voice. She is anxious to hear Nicholas say she looks beautiful and forces him to say so, this infantile behaviour matches her personality and role as a Gothic heroine.
There is always an antagonist who opposes the protagonists. In this specific scene, the antagonists would be the women who despise Miranda. They laugh at her humble origins and gossip while she dances with Nicholas at the end of the scene.
The narrative structure in classical Hollywood cinema follows a cause-effect chain of events which can be applied to this scene as follows: Miranda lives at Dragonwyck and likes dancing, consequently, she attends the ball. Miranda wants to fit in at the dance therefore, she talks to the group of women but, the women are posh and Miranda is not, so they are rude to her. As Miranda is hurt, she runs away. Nicholas sees the incident and comes after her; he likes Miranda and wants to comfort her hence, he invites her to dance. Miranda accepts his offer because she is attracted to him.
In classical Hollywood cinema, the chain of events stems from the protagonist's actions and the protagonist's desire precipitates the story. This does not translate perfectly to Dragonwyck as Nicholas' desire for an heir stirs the story rather than solely Miranda. In this scene, however, the events are triggered by Miranda's desire to belong in Dragonwyck and her actions throughout the scene.
The combination of unrestricted and subjective narration can be appreciated in this scene. The spectator accompanies Miranda and experiences the events from her point of view sharing her judgment, such as when she walks into the room to sit with the other women. Even though there are no point of view shots, the spectator sees the group of girls just after Miranda looks out of the frame in the previous shot, therefore, the spectator is inclined to identify with the heroine.
The film also makes use of unrestricted narration with the effect of causing suspense and dramatic irony. The spectator sees Nicholas observing Miranda from behind the door but she does not know that Nicholas is watching her (Fig. 1), therefore, the audience can expect Nicholas to go after Miranda when she leaves. When the couple is outside, Nicholas asks Miranda if she is enjoying the ball, the spectator knows Nicholas' question is only strategic as he has been observing her.
The use of unrestricted narration in this scene creates suspense, while the spectator waits to see how Nicholas approaches Miranda, and also dramatic irony as Miranda appreciates Nicholas' empathy and care without being aware of him having seen everything. The use of shot-countershot makes this happen as the spectator sees what the protagonists see and also receives the extra information to move up in the hierarchy of knowledge.
This scene also fulfils another characteristic of Classical Hollywood Cinema, it has a strong sense of closure. The new equilibrium the narrative reaches when Nicholas consoles Miranda, seals the scene and wraps up the story for the spectator. The fade out emphasises the closure and aids the transition to the next scene which contrasts with this optimistic ending.
Classical Hollywood Cinema attempts to create a realistic sensation in its films. There is a natural flow and pace as events take place in this scene of Dragonwyck. The continuity editing system classical films put in practice serves to keep this genuineness through its unobtrusive way of joining the action. I will study the scene's visual style to explore how the technical elements are applied to this effect.
The scene opens with an establishing shot of the ballroom and people dancing to situate the spectator (Fig. 2). Then the film moves on to the protagonist, the camera tracks Miranda's movement to the two-shot with the French man. After their short conversation, the shot is not cut immediately as the spectator sees Miranda walk away. This grants realism because she moves naturally from one place to another; it gives the film continuity and also a sense of space. Tracking builds on the natural flow of the action such as when the protagonist moves away from the housekeeper and the camera pursues her as she goes outside. This movement is also symbolic now that it emphasises that Miranda is turning away from the ball and the people.
The abundant use of tracking helps maintain the pace, the characters set the rhythm and the camera complies with their actions. This use of the camera adds to the subjective narration of the scene. When Nicholas and Miranda are outside, she turns away from Nicholas at a certain point and Nicholas moves towards her. The shot is not cut, the camera follows their motions providing the action with continuity. When they start dancing to go back inside the camera imitates their movements and seems to be dancing with them, therefore, it acquires the tempo and gestures of the characters (Fig. 3).
When Miranda finally stands up at the end of the altercation with the young women, the camera tilts up with her movement. This subjective shot stresses the fact that Miranda is leading the action.
Match on action is used throughout the scene to ensure a fluid rhythm. In the shot with the French man, the spectator has seen Miranda move out of the frame and then re-enter again smoothly. When the heroine leaves the room with the women, match on action leads on to the next shot once again where the housekeeper talks to Miranda; this gives the sensation that the spectator is trailing Miranda in real time (Fig. 4). Towards the end of the scene when Miranda and Nicholas are dancing, the couple enters the ballroom and the shots from the outside and the inside are linked to maintain the natural progression of the scene.
A variety of shots is used in this scene. Alternating wide and medium shots drives the spectator to focus on different aspects or situations. When Miranda steps into the room with the women, a medium shot obliges the spectator to focus on her expression and see how something attracts her attention. A wide shot of the three women sitting and talking conveys what Miranda was looking at and where she is making her way to. During their argument, a medium close-up of Miranda makes the spectator focus on her expression as she gets angrier.
The camera also zooms out to offer a wide shot of the four women, this serves to show how Miranda is surrounded and cornered by the others (Fig. 5). When Miranda suddenly gets up, a wide shot of the room lets the spectator see that the other people in the room are aware of her raising her voice to the women (Fig. 6).
A series of shots shows the other people reacting to Miranda and Nicholas dancing together as they waltz into the ballroom. Before returning to a medium shot of the couple to hear them talking in a smaller frame, a tracking of one of the guests leads the camera to a medium shot of Johanna so that the spectator sees her reaction in particular, concerned by seeing her husband with their daughter's companion.
The use of shot/countershot and the respect of the eye line match, shows the interaction between characters when Miranda speaks with the other women. It is relevant to highlight the medium shot of Nicholas behind the door which permits the spectator see him looking at Miranda. He is also looking down, hence abiding by the eye line match. This keeps the continuity of the scene and the realism as the shots match the natural conversation.
On the other hand, the use of two-shot also stands out in this scene. When Miranda is outside, a wide shot lets the spectator see Nicholas arrive. This shot places the protagonists in context for the spectator and then passes to a more intimate two-shot (Fig. 7). This smaller frame permits the action to only focus on the couple and the attraction between them. Using a two-shot instead of shot/countershot as the characters talk stresses the fact that they are physically close, the couple is not separated.
A still camera can also create important effects. At the end of this scene as Miranda and Nicholas are dancing among the crowd, the camera stays still and sees them dance away, this shows how they are getting lost in the crowd and forgetting about everyone else.
The first aspect of mise-en-scne to take into account is the setting. The establishing shot previously mentioned introduces the location of the scene. The spectator recognises the room as Dragonwyck, the two wide shots offer different perspectives of the room and the decorations change its appearance, the place looks fancy and pompous. The fact that everyone is dancing and that there is an orchestra obviously places the spectator at one of the balls Nicholas mentions earlier in the film. The setting changes when Miranda walks outside. This setting acquires a symbolic significance, the change emphasises that Miranda and Nicholas are alone, together, and detached from everyone else.
The different shot sizes varies what is stressed in each frame, the wide shots want the spectator to focus on the surroundings and the atmosphere while the smaller frames want the spectator to centre on the characters, therefore, the performances. The last shots of the scene are symbolically charged as the spectator watches Nicholas and Miranda waltz into the ballroom and metaphorically push away all the other characters. The housekeeper descends the stairs, stunned at the sight of the couple, and they just dance in front of her and she walks away. Two of the girls who had insulted Miranda, are shocked by the couple and run to gossip with the other. The couple swiftly dances their way, free from the observers' disapproving stares.
Costume and make-up play an important part in this scene as it depicts a dance at Dragonwyck. The costumes the spectator sees in the first shot help situate the action as they hint to a special event. Miranda's costume is important as she is has dressed up for the occasion. The heroine has changed her dull, plain clothes for a fashionable and showy gown. The colour of her dress is also important now that she is wearing white, symbolising innocence and virtue.
When Miranda sits with the other women, the spectator appreciates she looks just like the others. They all share the same kind of dress and hairstyle. Miranda is trying to fit in, wearing the correct clothes to match the occasion, but she still does not feel comfortable and is not accepted by the guests.
An important prop in this scene is the fan Miranda is carrying. The other women also have fans, this again stresses the fact Miranda has the same attire as the others. In the first shot of Miranda in this scene, the manner in which she clutches the fan displays her nerves. Miranda is fiddling with it and cannot conceal her anxiety. Later on when she flees from the young women in the room, Miranda exits fanning herself (Fig. 8). With this action, she conveys her exasperation and indignation as well as her pride. During the conversation with the girls, Miranda opens and closes the fan various times, this gives away her nervousness.
The lighting adds a lot to the interpretation of this scene. Three-point lighting is the characteristic style of lighting used in classical cinema. Its presence in this scene is appreciated as Miranda is perfectly illuminated to look glamorous and so emphasise the fact that she has dressed up for the ball.
As Miranda is on her way outside, the housekeeper stops her. There is an evident change in lighting at this moment, the darkness symbolises her sadness. Her features and dress are no longer highlighted. The shadows which cover her as she makes her way to the terrace seem to be hiding her (Fig. 9). These contrasts also add realism to the scene to imitate the outdoors light at that time of day. When Nicholas is with her, the lighting highlights the difference between the couple now that the heroine, as opposed to Nicholas, is brightly illuminated.
Performance is an essential element of mise-en-scne to study during this scene. The first shot of Miranda in this scene reveals her to be insecure and overwhelmed by the ball as she is looking around and moving shyly (Fig. 10). When the French man addresses her, she is happy to learn he knows who she is although her inexistent knowledge of French causes her to turn away and feel out of place. Miranda does not understand what the other guests are telling the man and she looks bewildered. The lady who takes the French man away from Miranda does not even look at her but rudely interrupts their conversation. This confirms how Miranda is not accepted or respected by the other guests, which links on to her conversation with the young women.
Miranda politely asks the girls if she can join them, she is trying to sound posh and fit in. Her tone of voice, however, changes as the women attack her. The spectator can identify the pride in her voice and her indignation at the girls' attitude. She finally raises her voice in anger, picks up her dress, opens her fan and quits the room. Her performance shows how she wants to be as good as the others and not lose her composure though her actions prove her to be naive.
As regards the three women, their voices fade out when they see her arrive. Their sense of superiority resonates through their performance. The pauses and tone of voice indicate how they despise the protagonist, for example, their surprise to learn that Miranda's father is a farmer.
Nicholas is smiling, therefore, he is glad Miranda is fitting in and talking to people. Nicholas is serious and direct when he talks to Miranda outside which matches his personality. Miranda looks at him in admiration and is excited to hear him say how beautiful she looks. Miranda forces him to say so, in a childish manner, but Nicholas complacently does so. She is anxious and unburdens herself talking to him. She turns her back on Nicholas, again, uncovering her nerves. Their performances display their mutual affection which culminates in the dance. Nicholas and Miranda look at each intensely and their short dialogue clearly manifesting their happiness.
The end of the scene also permits the spectator to value how other characters react to the couple dancing. The guests gossip, move away and point at the couple expressing shock and surprise (Fig. 11). The shot of Johanna, on the other hand, simply transmits sadness as she looks at them and sighs.
Performance is the last element of mise-en-scne, as no motifs stand out in this scene, however, it is important to not overlook the use of sound. The ball music accompanies the scene as is expected of a dance scene, nonetheless, there is a change of music while Nicholas and Miranda are talking which is significant. The ball music fades out to a slower more dramatic music which matches the action as Miranda is telling Nicholas how she feels. The ball music returns when Nicholas is about to ask Miranda to dance with him, this complements the tone of the scene as it is livelier and more romantic.
This scene from Dragonwyck adheres to the visual style and narration of classic Hollywood cinema. The film effectively uses mise-en-scne to enrich the narration of the scene, and also, the spectator's understanding and interpretation of the characters and events. Close observation of the different elements of mise-en-scne, the narrative structure and the visual style offers valuable information to, and swiftly guides, the spectator through the scene. The shots are elegantly sewn together through invisible editing and this combination of elements proves the scene to be a worthy example of classic Hollywood cinema.