In this essay I intend to study the different interpretations history in Waterland has undergone since the publication of the novel in 1983. At the time Waterland was released, New Historicism and Poststructuralism dominated literary criticism. However, during the 1990s, criticism turned towards ethics, therefore, newer readings of Swift's novel devote themselves to the ethical and psychological considerations of Waterland. I aim to cover this wide range of readings and interpretations.
In one of the earliest readings of Waterland, Del Ivan Janik pinned down the three main threads of history the novel develops: history as inquiry, as a subject and as stories. These three sides of the same theme have led to multiple interpretations and readings in the light of postmodernism, trauma studies or advocacy criticism. In 'The Novels of Graham Swift', Tams Bnyei states that literary criticism of Swift's novels either tends to study what Linda Hutcheon names "historiographic metafiction" and predominantly looks at Waterland, or, review of all of his novels, focusing on mourning and melancholia. A few years later, Stef Craps took this further, identifying a third trend of humanist ethical criticism which takes Swift's fiction as realist.
Linda Hutcheon set the premises for the study of history in Waterland, thanks to her definition of "historiographic metafiction" in 1988 which she continues exploring in posterior studies. Hutcheon seeks to enquire the relationship between fiction and history. Her study is still referenced and contested by critics today.
Hutcheon's studies correspond to the trends in criticism during the 1980s. Her reading of Waterland is clearly poststructuralist as she is fascinated by its representation of history. Hutcheon responds to critics who accuse postmodernism of denying history and insists on Waterland not rejecting history but reinterpreting it from the present. History in postmodernism is characterised by its problematic relationship with the present and its deconstruction in texts, fragmented narratives and subjective narrators, such as Waterland's Tom Crick, are essential means to do so. History is depicted in Waterland as a detotalized and subjective reality; it becomes a constructed discourse just like fiction.
Historiographic metafiction challenges history and Waterland's self awareness enables it to examine the state of history. Hutcheon's exploration of historiographic metafiction and Waterland argues for the relevance of history in postmodernism. However, she leaves a gap as regards the effect the treatment of history may have, besides the questioning of its trueness, which is filled in by posterior studies.
Pamela Cooper and Donald P. Kaczvinsky continue from Hutcheon's definition of historiographic metafiction and open a new area for the interpretation of Waterland as they bring in postcolonialism. Cooper accentuates the contradictory and problematic qualities of history Waterland considers; however, she researches this within a postcolonial frame. Cooper discerns the imperialistic aspects present in the novel and studies how they serve to examine history.
Cooper inaugurates a debate about women stating that the postmodern issues of women's sexuality and role in history are also evident in Waterland
. She plays up the episodes concerning reproduction and women and conveys how they translate into the form of a threat to the rigid structures of imperialism and linear progression.
Kaczvinsky also brings postcolonialism into his reading of Swift's work. However, he bares a more typically historicist interpretation. He believes Waterland may be seen as a piece of historiographic metafiction, which, through its commitment to history, endeavours to scrutinize distress related to history, stating the novel's major concern is the fact that history may have reached its end. Swift strives to create a national identity, exhibiting the complexity and rebuttal of history through the metaphorical Fens.
David Malcolm reviews Graham Swift's oeuvre in depth in one of the few monographic studies of the author, Understanding Graham Swift, in 2005. Malcolm carries out a stimulating exploration of the metafictional quality of Swift's novels as notes that Waterland is rich in genre collation. He claims the genre overlapping is closely related to its study of history and explanatory striving. The protagonist looks for a way to grasp reality and truth. Swift borrows from a variety of genres to illustrate this tension and the problematic relationship between history, reality and the present. The evaluation of the validity of different narratives relates to its evaluation of history.
The interaction between fiction and history is an essential aspect to consider when studying Waterland. Historians John Brewer and Stella Tillyard and critic George P. Landow concentrate on this dichotomy in their readings of the novel. Aligned with the postmodern criticism of the time, Brewer and Tillyard believe history and fiction are by no means incompatible. They expand on the debate Waterland introduces as regards private history and story-telling versus official history and reiterate the supremacy of the former over the latter. The historians insist on the fictional side of history and stress the relevance of fiction to history writing; they utilise the novel's reflections to argue the increasing importance of alternative histories and claim Waterland thus illustrates the evolution history writing has also experienced. However, the historians are disappointed with Waterland as it hints at the victory of story-telling and natural history over official history but does not reach the conclusive resolution they support. Brewer and Tillyard illustrate a particular branch of thought and investigation of the 1980s with their postmodern view of history. Nevertheless, they only discuss the depiction of history in Waterland in depth, overlooking any other side it may have.
In his poststructuralist reading of Waterland, Landow builds on the relationship between history and fiction. He agrees with the inaugural link Brewer and Tillyard placed between history and story-telling, and contributes by exploring Waterland as a postmodernist autobiographical text; therefore he concentrates on the protagonist's construction of personal history rather than the portrayal of national history.
Landow indicates that Waterland's particular donation to postmodernism resides in the fact that the protagonist is in the middle of a crisis, therefore his account fails to be unimpeachable. Crick's exploration matches the inquisitive function of history other critics have identified. However, in considering the novel a fictional life story, Landow casts a light on autobiographical writing through invoking its reverberations in Waterland. Landow discusses the implications of story-telling and highlights how Crick argues for the need of history based on his desire to discover the reasons that have led to his present situation. This explanatory and investigative task leads to the construction of personal histories, hence, Landow's study of autobiography.
In the light of a Marxist reading, John Schad recovers the postmodern theme of the end of history which Tom Crick muses on in Waterland
. His reading of the novel represents the advocacy criticism that emerged in literary criticism in the 1980s. Damon Marcel Decoste retrieves Schad's reading, but is immersed in the repercussions for the inquisitive facet of history.
Schad identifies a political side to the end of history pointed to in Waterland, which he names a "politics of nothing" which, in his opinion, derives in a "theology of nothing". In Schad's view, the religious and the revolutionary are intertwined. Schad points to a series of events in Waterland's story that have both a religious and a political signification. Besides the clear Marxist meaning Schad identifies in the revolutionary acts Crick refers to in the novel, he also interprets a religious one.
Furthermore, Schad highlights the references to exchange and capitalism in Waterland
. Crick's wife Mary kidnaps a baby, she believes is sent from God, from a supermarket, and Schad even draws attention to the relevance of Crick's pupil Price, whose name brings capitalism to mind and whose ideas personify the tension between capitalism and revolution.
Decoste distances himself from other critics to focus strongly on the inquisitive dimension of history in Waterland which critics such as Schad or Landow overlook. Decoste agrees with Schad's earlier interpretation of the end of history, but underlines the relevance of exploring history as an endless inquiry now that historical investigation may avoid the end of history and its circularity: it implies a never ending study into the past.
Furthermore, Decoste echoes a New humanist interpretation. He concludes Waterland refers to one's responsibility in the world; Decoste believes in one's ability for inquiry as the alternative to, and the means to defeat, the nothingness of reality Crick alludes to. Decoste claims Swift hopes to provoke in the reader the responsibility to question historical narratives and "fairy-tale endings".
Graham Swift is also read as a Postmodern Realist. Catherine Bernard and Amy J. Elias identify Swift as a reworker of the traditional novel. They value Hutcheon's contribution to understanding Swift; however, these critics centre on the novelist's realist heritage.
In 'Meta-mimesis? The problem of British Postmodern Realism' Elias elucidates the poststructuralist readings of Waterland as she considers Swift's novel to be a postmodern realist work. Elias separates herself from Hutcheon to identify subgenres in postmodern fiction. Her study contains hints of the ethical turn in criticism during the 1990s; she follows a poststructuralist approach but concentrates on the text's content rather than style.
As Elias explains, Waterland does not easily fit into the experimental style of postmodernism nor Realism. Elias discusses whether Waterland, and similar novels, could be creating a new genre and suggests a new thread of criticism should study this "postmodern Realism". Elias suggests that Waterland disintegrates and imitates realism. She argues Postmodern realist novels develop "realistic rationale for the action that takes place within its pages, and yet the world...each records is distinctly postmodern". Elias shows how Waterland fits into this category as Crick's primal focus is on his own life, hence satisfying Realism; and his story epitomises postmodern concerns. Furthermore, Elias details her interpretation and proposes Waterland as "psychological Realism" because Crick reveals his psychological situation. Likewise, Waterland projects a personal situation to a whole society, therefore, it may also be described as "social Realism".
Bernard introduced the debate of postmodern Realism in her earlier work, Graham Swift: La parole chronique and in 'Dismembering/Remembering Mimesis'. Bernard also advocates for the reworking of Realism in Swift's novels as a means of representing postmodern concerns; however, her approach pays attention to the linguistic materiality of Waterland, proper of the first wave of poststructuralist readings of the 1980s, rather that the genre/content approach Elias carries out.
History is summoned in Waterland to explain the present. Waterland branches out to produce a never-ending inquiry and establishes links between individuals and their histories but only reveals the impossibility of finding real answers. Therefore, Bernard agrees with Hutcheon, the reworking of traditional Realism displays a postmodern view of the world. Bernard echoes historicism, in particular, historiographer Hayden White's ideas. She sees Waterland turn to a contextualist model of history through the need to pursue investigation into individual histories.
Even though the traumatic events of the past have an explanatory task, they actually serve to reveal the limitations of language and discourse. Turning to history requires a backward motion, from present to past. Waterland's discourse reflects this through its fragmented structure, repetitions and metaphors, and shifts from past to present tenses. Crick's argument that history repeats itself is conveyed through the repeated metaphors and as Bernard analyses, the shifts in tenses serve to manifest the fragility of the present faced by the power of the past.
Reality challenges discourse now that it takes language to its own limit reflecting the trauma history and the past bring; hence, language suffers just like Waterland's protagonists do. The reality and the truth Waterland reveal are excessive, therefore its representation is strenuous.
Randall Stevenson gathers Swift's references to historical events to identify the Englishness in the novel. These evoked memories are crucial elements due to their portrayal of historical events and consequent creation of a national identity. Echoing a historicist reading of Waterland, Stevenson claims the legacy of the Second World War is particularly strong in the memories surfaced and in the historical narrative of the novel. The importance of official centralist history for Stevenson clearly lies in the depiction of the war and its immediate consequences for the protagonists.
Far from the study of historical representation in discourse and language, and returning to the historicist ideas Bernard points to, Hanne Tange carries out a regionalist reading of Waterland
. As opposed to Stevenson's reading, Tange identifies the importance of regional history to portray how Waterland denounces centralism. Cairn Craig's Out of history paradigm, which Tange takes to study the use of history in Waterland, is based on the notions of peripherality and centralism, echoing the concepts Bernard alludes to. Traditional history has always offered a centralist perspective, obviating marginal experience. Regionalism responds to this, giving a voice to the periphery.
Waterland offers a substitute to Britishness. Tange demonstrates how the protagonist embraces peripherality, Tom Crick abandons national and international history in favour of the history of his own region. Tange believes Waterland voices Swift's rejection of Thatcherite centralism. She does not treat the text as an independent product but regards its socio-historical context. Tange believes Crick's inquiry into history, and consequent realisation that history cannot provide definite answers, represents the social concerns of the early 1980s, when Waterland was published.
Echoing White's philosophy as regards the fictional content of history, Tange accentuates the importance of story-telling in the novel. Its mythological and escapist qualities, and relevance to marginal culture, are also evidence of Swift's campaign against centralism. Tange originates an interpretation of history zooming in on the implications of the regional and natural histories, thus opening a less developed field of study.
Critics such as Stef Craps, Adrian Poole, Wendy Wheeler and Tams Bnyei have all examined the ethical dimension of Swift's fiction, corroborating the change literary criticism experienced in the 1990s. Bnyei recognises the resemblances between historicist and ethical readings of Swift's novels now that both interpret how the protagonist interrelates with historical events. He indicates that Waterland distinguishes narrative as a remedy for trauma and also, as a cultural and ethical human act. Another relevant reflection of Bnyei's is that Waterland's narratives are heteroglossic, there are mythological, metaphysical, metahistoric and magical elements which all contribute to Crick's confession and redemptive discourse.
Wheeler picks up from Bnyei's interpretation and claims Swift's fiction tries to overcome the characteristic melancholia of modernity. Poole also addresses the subject of mourning. He acknowledges the historical depth and cultural memories in Swift's novels and investigates the impact the use of memory has in a social reading. Poole stresses the importance of kinship, shared experience and collective memory. The critic discusses personal bonds as a crucial aspect in Swift's work and relates the act of mourning with structure and discourse. The use of personal narratives and relevance of story-telling ease the act of mourning, it is the characters' way of dealing with loss and guilt and searching for redemption.
The social strand of mourning for Poole lies in the fact that, even though it is a personal experience, it can also be a collective one. Waterland's characters have participated in certain common experiences and all mourn their loss. Even though the characters may be separated spiritually or physically, they are nevertheless bonded through these shared realities.
Stef Craps agrees with the readings of Poole and Wheeler and distances herself from those of Schad or Landow which concentrate on history as knowledge. Without denying the quality of the novel as historiographic metafiction, Craps concentrates on the ethical value of history. She identifies the main trends in literary criticism and parts herself from trauma studies.
Craps refers to Bernard's reading and agrees with her interpretation of Waterland reusing traditional realist conventions, nevertheless, she states Bernard's reading is limited because she denies any relationship to ethics. Craps refers to the elements of discourse critics such as Bernard emphasise, but demonstrates how the shifts from past to present tense and the disjointed narrative simply communicate trauma.
While Decoste interpreted the inquisitive side of history as a means to avoid the end of history, Craps interprets it as the way in which to find one's "ethical way of being in the world". Furthermore, the critic identifies a positive resolution in the novel, echoing new Humanism but distinguishing a tendency towards alterity, now that Craps asserts Waterland's campaign to promote curiosity and inquiry entails a chance to overcome trauma and find "renewal".
More recent critics of Swift's work have responded to Linda Hutcheon's historiographic metafiction. Daniel Lea and Peter Widdowson both engage in a revision of Swift's oeuvre and illuminate criticism, agreeing on the inadequacy of labelling Swift postmodern. Besides acknowledging Waterland as historiographic metafiction, Widdowson responds to Hutcheon and questions pigeonholing Swift as a postmodern writer. In his study, Widdowson also draws attention to the New Humanism of Swift's novels. Even though Waterland ends in a pessimistic tone, the promotion of love in the novel stands out for the critic as an element of new humanism which, in hand with telling stories, he considers to be Swift's contribution to avoid "postmodern anomie".
Lea places Swift's fiction under the umbrella of social realism. Even if Swift reflects on major postmodern concerns, Lea also finds it erroneous to limit interpretations of Swift to the frame of postmodernism. Lea's major argument rests on the weight of psychology in Swift's novels.
Lea illustrates the ethical turn of literary criticism in his interpretation of history and memory. The protagonist's endeavour to investigate his own past results in the interaction of public and private histories and the study of their common ground. For Lea, rather than planning a representation of official history, Waterland appraises the psychological implications of, and reasons for, penetrating personal history. The novel uncovers the consequences major historical events have on its characters. The protagonist brings back memories, accentuating traumas and serving as an apology, though more obviously as a self-justification. This therapeutic use of history projects the ethical and psychological edge of the novel. Moreover, Waterland's narrative mirrors the protagonist's emotional state. The disordered story, superposition of chronologies and historical eras reflect Crick's unstable mind.
Recovering the mythological references mentioned in Bnyei's reading, it is interesting to turn to Philip Tew's study on the mythopoeic value of Swift's fiction. Widdowson asserts Swift humanizes his characters through the promotion of love and kinship, but for Tew, the humanization lies in the mythical quality of his work. The engagement with the past and with history ultimately transmits a mythical recovery of it. The symbolic and imaginary references abound and the novel's protagonist, caught in a crisis and fearing reality, longs for a mythical time.
In The Contemporary British Novel, Philip Tew highlights the mythologizing of history Swift undertakes. Tew identifies a new trend in contemporary fiction which interrelates history with myth. Tew confirms the postmodern style of Swift's fiction but only to shift his analysis from the historical realism to the "myth making". He identifies a nostalgic desire in Waterland, like Poole or Craps, but in his reading, Crick longs for a mythical past. The protagonist's memories are therapeutic; by travelling to the past and mythologizing history, Crick deals with his present concerns. Tew quotes Moretti's interpretation of myth and history stating that myths humanize history and by doing so, one finds consolation from reality.
Dominic Head also pinpoints the supernatural and superstition in Waterland
. Picking up on the Postmodern reading of Swift's novels and touching on the ecocriticism that emerged chiefly during the mid 1990s, Head leads to an ecocritical analysis. He builds on the use of personal memory and, like Lea or Poole, states the personal narratives allow one to read Swift's fiction as social novels and, also, privilege reader's identification. Head emphasises the way in which narratives amalgamate and clash and brings out the importance of the region like Tange; however, to point up a connection with nature. Moreover, like Malcolm, Head argues that a range of literary genres overlap but underlines the presence of the provincial novel. Nevertheless, Head admits that even though Waterland revolves around natural history it ultimately leaves the natural environment aside to privilege human experience.
Fred Botting brings up aspects other critics have studied; however, he adds a new vision through his reading of Waterland's "holes" and "navels". Botting explains how memory permits an inquiry into history to find the necessary knowledge to fill in history's holes, which demonstrates his affinity with readings such as Decoste's. Echoing the debate on fact and fiction and genre mixture, mentioned by other critics, Botting suggests fiction may aid the hole-filling and the complex historical investigation results in the presentation of numerous histories. Holes are also visible in the text's structure and unresolved doubts and unexplained issues, thus linking Botting's reading of holes with Lea's or Crap's interpretations of the novel's disjointed narrative. Botting uses the cultural and physical symbol of a navel to illustrate the bonds between person and history, and the common elements within the novel.
Botting opens a less examined debate with a reading strongly influenced by psychoanalysis. The exploration of the origins implies a return to maternal origins. Also, Botting states that the paternal fails to control feminine sexuality, nature and the real which leads to a paternal-maternal tension. Cooper's reading of Waterland already introduced this topic but in a postcolonial frame. Botting identifies history as the womb in which the quest develops; this exploration brings up more psychoanalytical issues such as hysteria, desire and lack, related to the incessant inquiry and unexplainable events; or doubling and repetition, linked to trauma and repression.
All of Waterland's critics, independently of their school of thought, seem to agree on its historical baggage and its concern for the past's weight on the present. However, Botting reinterprets this claiming the openness of history. In his opinion, the possibility of revisiting the past shows that they have no definite meaning, set by the present or by the past.
Wendy Wheeler notices how Waterland depictures the "transformation of a sublimely ungraspable 'nothing' into the 'something' of the everyday". This revolution illustrates the evolving reading of Swift's fiction. Looking into history in Waterland entails a riveting study, giving rise to debates as regards historical validity, ethical implications or even governmental policies. It attracts, and at times confronts, interpretations from different critical theories. The heterogeneous range of readings conveys how the novel has encouraged in depth analyses since its publication and still nurtures critics to reflect on it, interpreting and reinterpreting the presentation and ramifications of history.