The role of Liverpool city council is to ensure the city is an ideal place to reside, work and invest in. 'We will create a modern, cosmopolitan and confident premier European city, at the heart of a prosperous and confident region. Liverpool's citizens will be free from ignorance, prejudice and poverty and the city will be a magnet for business and visitors.' (Liverpool City Council 2004) The councils focus is to not only make Liverpool city centre a great place to visit but also ensure the communities which surround it are taken care of; local employment being one of the top priorities (Liverpool City Council 2004). Liverpool city council has set up the Liverpool culture Company, who are responsible for working with local communities, businesses and organisations to work towards the goals of 2008 and make them long lasting. Their main aim is to leave a long-term and beneficial legacy for the cities residents by providing more jobs as well as helping to create a stronger economy (Liverpool 08). Richie and Crouch (2003) suggest that for tourism development to be truly sustainable, suitable management decisions need to be made with regards to the four primary pillars of sustainability; these being the ecological, economic, socio-cultural, and political environment. For any destination this involves many complexities and challenges.
Evans (2003) suggests it is important to carry out an audit of the resources an organisation has. With regards to the city council their main resource inputs include:
Baum (1995) suggests that tourism development can generate jobs over a broad spectrum from high end managerial positions to low skill entry level and service jobs.
Rates of unemployment in Liverpool in 2005 were 3.3% higher than the national average (ONS 2005). In different aspects of education this was a similar case too, where for example attainment in level 3 plus NVQ's were approximately 9% less than the national average. The city council have identified that even though Liverpool has grown rapidly from an economic perspective the employment rate which is steadily growing is still well below national average (Liverpool City Council 2005). The Liverpool city Regional Development Programme (2005) has suggested that over the next few years the city will see more than 23,000 new jobs created (Liverpool City Council 2005). The Liverpool strategic employment partnership is working to tackle high unemployment rates by making residents more employable. One of their targets is to equip working age adults with NVQ level two skills on par with the rest of the country, so they have basic skills for employment (Liverpool City Council 2005). The Merseyside Objective One programme also has similar interests. The programme funded by the European Union helps finance some of the most deprived areas in Europe. The money which comes from the European social fund has four main areas of focus that include: training, job search, guidance and work experience. One of the many projects they have funded is the regeneration of the Speke Garston neighborhood of Liverpool, where projects on community education and training courses have been made available (ESF 2003). An example of the European social fund helping locals become more employable is the Huyton Churches training scheme. Since the construction boom began after the city was awarded the capital of culture title there was seen to be a shortage of floor layers. The training scheme in floor laying has helped many unemployed people to receive skills which make them employable in this industry (ESF 2005).
Liverpool council carries a positive attitude to the development suggesting that the city will become a top visitor destination in Europe. Evans (2003) suggests having a competitive advantage is worthy however the position needs to be maintained if the investment and effort is to pay off.
Principles of sustainability refer to the environmental, economic and socio-cultural aspects of tourism development. It is suggested a sustainable balance needs to be created between these three areas to make sure the result is durable (WTO 2004).
Furthermore it can be argued that tourism can help sustain economies without harming the environment on which it depends on. The city council have formed the Liverpool first prospectus which focuses on setting out a vision for the city taking into consideration the environmental, economical and social welfare of the city. The plans main focus surrounds what is part of the local agenda twenty one process.
From an economic perspective Richie and Crouch (2003) propose development strategies implemented should benefit the majority of the local community rather than the minority. It is suggested when a destination such as Liverpool is developing fast this can result in land speculation which increases the price for land as well as rent for both domestic and commercial property. Evidence from the national housing federation suggests housing prices in the north west over the past few years have not grown in line with the of the UK. As a result getting on the property ladder for a proportion of Liverpool's population is tough, as in order to buy a house many people will have to take a mortgage many times higher than what they earn. Local realtors suggest that the main reason for this rise is due to the win of Liverpool as Capital. (Liverpool Daily Post 2006).
For the residents of Liverpool to enjoy a quality of life more needs to be taken into consideration than economic security. Ritchie and Crouch (2003) propose that 'the health and vitality of social and cultural systems and institutions helps to create an environment which resident find meaningful in their pursuit of happiness. They may be prepared to trade economic considerations for quality-of life aspirations' (Ritchie and Crouch 2003 p 47). Furthermore it is suggested that when tourists travel to a destination much of their motivation to visit that specific destination is to view the culture. This is especially the case of Liverpool as it has been designated a title based on culture. Kotler et al (1993) suggests certain marketing factors need to be taken into account. These include: viewing the community and looking and analysing it from an external and internal perspective. As well as this it is important to take into consideration the goals and desires of the local community, and come up with a strategic plan. Finally the most complex challenge is implementing the strategic decisions which are made by the local community. If a strategic plan is not drawn out with regards to cultural preservation, the culture that the Liverpool desires to showcase may well be lost. Furthermore Ritzer (1993) proposes that if destinations are not able to preserve their culture they are at the risk of becoming a victim of 'McDonaldisation' thus a standardised global city. In many cases this was already evident in Liverpool with global companies such as Selfridges, Debenhams and international chains of hotels dominating much of the city centre developments.
Cooper (1998) suggests as a destination develops the service it provides often becomes institutionalised and as a result the destination becomes one which attracts a large amount of tourists. Mass tourism can have many negative impacts , such as in Majorca an island which has totally lost its identity due to large amounts of tourists destroying many areas of its infrastructure not just environmentally but also culturally. Liverpool city council needs to control development after 2008, so it can control the amount of arrivals in the city. If they are able to do this, it is only then the 'culture' that the many stakeholders are wanting to achieve in the city will become sustainable.
It is evident that Liverpool City Council has a vital role to play in the development of the city. From primary and secondary research it is clear that the city has many problems and issues especially from an economic perspective. However the Capital of Culture title that they have won has given the city many opportunities to redevelop itself and make Liverpool into a world class tourist destination. However for this to happen the city needs to take a strategic approach if the legacy is to be long lasting. For this to happen the city council need to take into consideration issues regarding sustainability and the complexities surrounding it.