Alexander Fleming's discovery of penicillin followed an improbable sequence of events that was one of the most important medical advances in history, eventually changing the way disease was treated.
"We unconsciously learned a great deal from nature" , said Fleming of his family, whose childhood was spent on his family's farm in Scotland, one mile from the nearest house. Fleming inherited 250 when his uncle died, and his brother, who already owned an established medical practice, encouraged Fleming to put the money towards the study of medicine. Fleming studied at St Mary's Hospital, London.
Fleming was one of the first people to administer the chemical treatment Salvarsan for syphilis, developed by Paul Ehrlich in 1909. After seeing the wounds of French soldiers in World War I Fleming contemplated that there must be a chemical treatment like Salvarsan that would help fight microbe infection. He discovered the enzyme lysozyme by accidentally sneezing into a bacterium-laced Petri dish. Lysozyme had natural antibacterial properties, but not against strong infectious agents, so Fleming continued his search.
In 1928 Fleming left a culture plate smeared with Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, known for turning wounds septic, open; by his next observation, a spore of Penicillium P. notatum had drifted in from the microbiology laboratory on the floor below and the bacteria cells were lysing. He "correctly deduced that the mould must have released a substance that inhibited the growth of the bacteria" .
A report was published about this in the British Journal of Experimental Pathology, in which Fleming wrote, "[Penicillin] may be an efficient antiseptic for application to, or injection into, areas infected with penicillin-sensitive microbes." His discovery raised little interest, and Fleming discontinued his research. Eight years later a team of scientists at Oxford University lead by Howard Florley directed further research, and in 1941 demonstrated its chemotherapeutic properties and added lots of information. Finally penicillin was recognised as a vital drug, much better than those prescribed at the time
such as the sulphonamides, and it was used in the treatment of septic wounds and venereal disease. By 1941 vast batches of synthetic penicillin were in production that could defeat some of the most common and lethal diseases of the time, such as gangrene and tuberculosis. In 1945 Fleming shared a Nobel Prize with Florey and Chain for its discovery.
Although Alexander Fleming was not the first to describe the antibacterial properties of Penicillium, he was the first to recognise the significance of his findings. Fleming modestly admitted this: "My only merit is that I did not neglect the observation and that I pursued the subject as a bacteriologist" . Although his major discoveries were coincidental, those singular contributions have changed the practice of medicine. The establishment of penicillin as a fundamental drug inspired the search for other antibiotics and in the decade after its launch a number of new antibiotics were discovered, greatly widening the scale of antibiotic therapy.