Differential stains use different coloured dyes to illustrate differences between bacterial groups or provide contrast to different structures within the same organism. They are more complex than simple ones and work by reacting based on the chemical composition on organisms, so differences are clearly shown.
The most common differential stains are:
The Gram stain is usually the first test performed for the identification of bacteria. It was developed in 1884 by Hans Christian Gram, who wanted to differentiate between bacteria and lung tissue in the morgue in which he worked. He discovered that all bacteria fell into two groups when stained by Gram method, based on permeability: Gram positive (+) and Gram negative ( - ). The contrasting characteristics of Gram + and Gram - bacteria are shown in the following table:
The Gram stain procedure uses 3 different stains: crystal violet, Gram's iodine, and safranin respectively. Sometimes crystal violet is substituted with methylene blue, and safranin with fuchsin. Some Gram-positive bacteria may lose the crystal violet stain easily and are called Gram-variable, as they appear as a mixture of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. The following table shows what colour the bacteria show at each stage in the process.
The following factors may prevent the Gram stain procedure's accuracy:
This procedure measures the resistance of a stained cell to decolourisation by acids. The bacteria that are not discoloured are called 'acid-fast', and are Mycobacteria and Actinomycetes, which contain a waxy cell envelope preventing the penetration of most stains.
Carbol fuchsin is used, which can penetrate the cell wall as it is lipid soluble, and the cell wall is melted by steam heating. Acid-alcohol will only decolourise the bacteria species that are not acid-fast. After this counter stain, acid-fast organisms are red and the others are blue. This stain is common to Gram staining, in that carbol fuchsin will not easily rinse away in positive cells, an acid alcohol is used as decolouriser, and the counterstain is methylene blue, which, as mentioned above, is sometimes used to replace crystal violet in Gram staining.
The Acid Fast stain is useful in the diagnosis of diseases caused by acid-fast species such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and M. leprae.
This stain is used to detect the presence or location of spores in bacterial cells. Spores can resist many adverse environmental conditions, and their identification is very important in analysing body fluid or tissue because only a few genera produce spores such as Bacillus and Clostridium, which together cause a number of diseases such as botulism, tetanus, anthrax, and gangrene.
Malachite green is used to dye the cell and spore walls using steam. There is no need for a decolouriser in this staining procedure because, if washed with water, the dye comes away from the cell wall but not the spore wall. Therefore, the steam decolourises the cell walls. The vegetative cells are then counterstained with safranin.
"The cell walls of many bacterial species are surrounded by a polymeric substance referred to as a capsule (if discrete) or slime later (if amorphous)". These capsules perform numerous physiological functions, but are water soluble and so simple stains will not hold. Capsule staining works by staining the bacteria and background more intensely than the capsule itself. First a negative acidic stain (e.g. crystal violet) is applied to the background, and then a basic stain is applied to the capsule (e.g. copper sulphate).
Capsule staining is useful because the presence of large capsules generally indicates the presence of a virulent form of some bacterial species (e.g. pneumococci).