During the transformation from the Elizabethan times to the early Stuart era, the Church of England increasingly intervened in society; supposedly, this prompted a greater compliance to its moral values. A range of sources, particularly the records of the ecclesiastical courts, indicate that a better educated and more godly ministry, alongside newly found grammar schools that inculcated "right religion in the young", were ostensibly triumphant at elevating moral standards. For example, the medium-sized rural parish of Terling, the changes it went through allegedly a representation of "national or even supra-national developments", had an infant illegitimacy ratio of nine percent in the first decade of the seventeenth century; by the 1630s, this had reduced to only two percent. Nevertheless, the records historians utilise to measure the effect of the Church on everyday lives are limited; they may show an increase in moral standards, but fail to signify the motives for conformity. Villagers may have displayed compliance to the Church- three in four attending the 1603 Easter communion in the diocese of Lincoln- but probably for alternative reasons to religious conviction, such as avoidance of punishment like "fines, whipping, or imprisonment in the house of correction". Whether you believed the new ideas of the reformed church or not, conforming just to avoid publicly apologising to the whole parish in a white gown, holding a white candle, seems a prudent decision. Reports of churchwardens on their parishes are another unreliable source; a conclusion of omnia bene ('all is well') is normally reached, probably in an attempt to show that the job is being done properly. This is clearly a distortion of actuality, as proved by the activities the young of the parishes engaged in; they were notoriously promiscuous, Keith Thomas highlighting the attractiveness of bachelors to adopt "the role of seducer". From this, one could articulate the notion that the Church was only able to penetrate a narrow strand of society: the elderly and the literate- the latter because Protestantism was primarily concerned with the words of the Bible. Nevertheless, even the orthodoxy of this narrow band of society was more than likely motivated by the need to maintain their status- they could not "afford to remain excommunicate from one Easter to the next"- and convince workers that "idleness and waste" in the alehouse, truthfully bad for productivity, was irreligious. Consequently, this essay will argue that only a relatively small number of people progressively conformed to the moral values of the Church in this period; yet their reasons were mostly different to deep conviction in what the Church was amplifying.
The efforts made to assert the dominance of Anglicanism in England- notably the demands by Archbishop Grindal of York that "the Churchwardens shall see that in their churches and chapels all altars be utterly taken down, and clean removed even unto the foundations"- were often so meticulous and overpowering that parishes were converted into eager supporters of Church principles. Certainly, the growth of prosecutions by the laity against non-conforming ministers illustrates this. In particularly fervent villages, there were complaints against clergymen who did not read prayers at the usual time and those who deliberately delayed the ringing of the bell signifying the beginning of a prayer reading- this being emblematic of a vicar with Catholic tendencies, as they were obviously trying to sabotage common prayers, preferring the traditional stratified readings. Interestingly, J.A.Sharpe has argued that a non-conforming clergy surely emblemises the lack of control the Church had over local parishes. Indeed, Lancashire was reported to have only six of twenty-five justices favourable of the established church in 1564. How can people be even aware of the central Church's moral values when their ministers were overwhelmingly non-Protestant? Nonetheless, measuring the conformity of the clergy does not give a full indication of how successful the church was; they are people more likely to maintain their beliefs whatever social controls are imposed upon them. Focusing on the laity, however, and their high levels of conformity, apparently symbolises the triumph of the Church in permeating society at a local level.
Interestingly, some parishes campaigned for a rise in the number of services throughout the week and, in Lincoln particularly, for proper observance of saint's days. Unquestionably, there was a deep commitment to the Book of Common Prayer; contrary to the beliefs of Martin Ingram who highlights that support of the Established church was possibly for ulterior motives such as guaranteeing the poor were using their time productively, the willingness of people to engage in "time consuming" battles to settle disputes with rebellious ministers shows a society deeply dedicated to the values advanced by the Church. Furthermore, the conception that Protestantism only really affected the literate, privileged classes is disproved by the broad cross-section of society, "from a 'Mr' Thockmorton to the labourer Margaret Gates", that criticised non-conforming ministers; out of the thirteen parishioners who denounced Anthony Armitage of Ellington, two were labourers- one of them a women- and eight made only marks, a possible indication of illiteracy, when signing the denunciation document. Indisputably, empirical evidence indicates that the church not only victoriously imposed its values on, but also indoctrinated, a diverse range of society: "Conformity had a fairly wide appeal socially and drew supporters from both the humble and the substantial".
Nevertheless, these examples of staunch moral values amongst a wide range of people were questionably isolated occurrences, rather than a general trend. Indeed, the research of Judith Maltby, which amplifies the eagerness of people to have proper church conduct, is restricted to the study of only a handful of parishes. Elsewhere, people were debatably unaffected; conservative villagers were sceptical to the new ideas of the church, as it was a "challenge to the traditional, less austere, system of belief". Excluding specific hotspots of religious observance such as Fenstanton and Hilton in Huntingdonshire, spreading God's word was difficult to organise, since educated clergymen were not attracted by the low wages of working in parishes. Thus, early modern England was a patchwork of religious conformity, the church varying in its success on imposing moral values depending on the village, consequently equalling- by the second half of the sixteenth century- a "half-Christianised" society.
Similarly, the achievement of the church relied not only on geographical location, but also on the age and social status of a particular member of society. The young, composing a sizeable proportion of society as "half the population may have been under twenty years of age", were largely disinterested and openly rebellious to Church demands; teenage servants had notoriously low attendance at sermons. Additionally, the Evening prayer was often subordinated for such events as football; in Nottingham 1608, thirty-five men were put before the court for such an offence. The youth maintained their lewd and ungodly culture, the Church unable to mould this large section of society into conformers: "The 'bawdy court', was powerless to force the youth of the parish into 'towardliness'". The church also failed to impose its values on another substantial portion of society. In the Early Stuart period especially, there was a clampdown on adultery, yet the lower class's "tradition of promiscuity" remained strong. Essentially, the post-Reformation church was a "more exclusive religion than pre-Reformation Catholicism had been", flawed by its appeal to only a narrow strand of society- the literate, middling sort. As a result, these people were the only ones really affected by the strict moral values amplified; the Church failed to effectively infiltrate other, probably larger, sections of early modern English society.
Contrastingly, Sharpe describes the entire of Elizabethan and early Stuart society as a "population...very unconvinced about the advantages of Protestantism"; thus, the reasons for conformity amongst the literate, middling sort were probably not due to religious conviction. Fascinatingly, the parishioners of Ellington requested Antony Armitage announce upcoming holy days; evidently not in tune with the Church calendar, the primary concern of these people was an avoidance of penalties. Furthermore, Ingram points to the fact that the arrest of fifteen men between 1624-25 in Keevil for drunkenness is closely linked with a time of economic distress; yeoman supposedly utilised religious morals to defend their demands for an increase in work and cut-back on leisure time. Still, these examples symbolise that religious moral values were assumed by society. However, they weren't accepted primarily because of firm conviction in the Church.
Yet, there were people who continued to break the rules, risking fines and other forms of punishment. Philip Stubbes, author of The Anatomie of Abuses, hints at a widespread lack of adherence to the requirements of the Church on a Sunday: villagers regularly did piping, carding and tennis-playing, and others spent "the Sabbath day (for the most part)...in bear-baiting, cock-fighting, hawking, hunting, and such like". The variety of sport mentioned, ranging from ones most members of society engaged in to ones probably only a privileged elite played, is indicative of how all levels of society, not just the young and poor, had not had strict moral values instructed into, or at least heavily imposed upon, them. This conception of prevalent non-conformity is elaborated by Patrick Collinson; he verbalises that the culture in villages was unreflective of the strict, pious archetype the Church aspired to install, Ideally, divorce and adultery were to be taboo issues; yet people explicitly resolved differences based on sexual infidelity in open courts: "This was not the kind of 'honour and shame' society in which sexual licence was unthinkable and sexual behaviour literally worse than death". Apparently, the restraints established were not sufficient to guarantee consistent and ardent conformity. Nevertheless, it must be observed that the Church may have failed to harness sport and customs in specific areas of England, but more pressing issues were heavily condemned and the majority listened: throughout the period outlined, the quantity of bridal pregnancies in Keevil rapidly decreased, confined to only a few poorer couples by the 1620s.
Undeniably, the Church imposed its moral values thoroughly in some regions of the country; the "increase in... Church court prosecutions relating to religious observance and personal morality" forced parishioners to conform. This is highlighted by the growth in demand for additional sermons and the healthier attendance of prayer readings. Yet, in some areas where Clergymen were lacking and conservative tendencies reigned, traditional 'ungodly' activities continued, villagers indulging in Sunday sports and unspeakable sexual infidelity. As a result, the success of the church fluctuated from village to village. Other variables included the age and social standing of members of the parish; unquestionably, the poor and young were largely unaffected by the crackdown on sexual activity and marital expectations. But even the literate elders, their belief in the established Church supposedly reinforced by the invention of the printing press and consequent spread of religious material, more than likely had hidden intentions for conforming, based mainly on the upholding of their status. Certainly, public penance and temporary excommunication were effective constraints on those who wished to deviate from expected moral standards. Ultimately therefore, the success of the church seems to be largely limited to merely preventing deviance from strict moral values, rather than getting people to actually believe in them; even this small accomplishment however, was confined to particular villages and members of society.