The viscosity of two different solutions, Glycerol and 1% Guar Gum will be studied using the Brookfield Viscometer. There are different size spindles so the correct one must be selected for the situation. The smaller sized spindles are generally used for solutions which are viscous and the larger spindles are used for less viscous solutions. Readings below 5 and above 95 are to be ignored and the spindle should be changed to try to obtain a better result. Varying the speed will give the set of results and by taking the factor and the reading we can determine the viscosity of each of the solutions. The results should be presented on ordinary graph paper and log/log paper and determined whether the solutions are Newtonian or non-Newtonian. Plot speed against the apparent viscosity.
It can be seen from the graphs that both glycerol and guar gum are Non-Newtonian and are shear thining. Both samples give a very similar graph with a loop between the ascending and descending readings where the path is not the same on the way back. The loop is larger during the middle four speeds. Both of these samples show that the results from the descending readings show a higher apparent viscosity than the ascending readings for the majority of the time.
Glycerol has a much higher viscosity than guar gum but both portray the same characteristics. From the graph it appears that the structure of the liquids are damaged by this process as the final descending reading does not reach the initial reading. This could mean that they are permanently damaged but this could be checked by leaving the samples for a period of time and then testing the samples to see if they do recover. If the reading goes back to the initial one then they are fully recoverable.
Examine the viscosity of three different samples and how it changes as the speed increases and decreases. The Haake Viscometer is a rotational viscometer and can be used to determine whether a fluid is Newtonian or non-Newtonian. Results will be presented as apparent viscosity versus shear rate curves.
The three samples to be examined are evaporated milk, tomato soup and custard. The correct spindles should be selected for each samples.
SPINDLE 3
SPINDLE 2
The graph showing how the apparent viscosity changes with the shear rate for evaporated milk shows that the liquid is Non-Newtonian, shear thining. The loop between the ascending and descending results shows that the same path is not followed and therefore the sample is time dependent as it takes a while for the molecules to realign. The viscosity goes back to where it started from therefore the molecules must have the ability to rearrange themselves at this speed showing that the evaporated milk is fully recoverable.
The tomato soup sample is also Non-Newtonian shear thining. The ascending and descending results follow the same path in this case and so this sample is not time dependent. The descending reading for the minimal speed is not the same as the ascending reading and may mean that the tomato soup is permanently damaged. This could be determined by leaving it for a period of time and then starting again with the sample to see if the initial reading was the same as before. If it is then the tomato soup needs time for the molecules to recover and reform the same structure. If is it not the same then the structure of the soup has been permanently damaged.
The result for the custard is very similar to tomato soup as it is Non-Newtonian shear thining and not time dependent as it follows the same pathway during the ascending and descending readings. However the descending reading for the minimal speed is nearer to the initial reading and may need time to see if the sample recovers. If it does then it is fully recoverable and if it does not then it will have been permanently damaged.
This sort of testing allows us to learn a lot about the materials we are examining. If very accurate results were required this could be achieved by repeating several times to gain a good understanding of the exact manner of each sample and ensuring that the results were not inaccurate.