To examine the effects of pasteurizing apple juice and the effects different clearing agents have on the haze. Also to look at and compare the pectin and starch content, the pH and the total solids of different fruit juices.
Fruit juices are produced by pressing the fruit to gain the juice. When choosing fruit for this procedure there are many aspects to look at including the pH, the quality of the fruit, the sugar content, and the tannin content. In the food industry the juice is then usually subjected to some form of processing before reaching a final product.
Pasteurization was envisioned by Louis Pasteur and is aimed at the destruction of pathogenic micro-organisms. Fruit juice can be pasteurized which can be a fairly severe heat treatment. This process reduces the number of microorganisms present which in turn, preserves the product and prolongs the shelf life. Pasteurization also inactivates the enzymes that form polyphenols, which is desirable as this retards browning. Although it has many benefits, pasteurization can have some undesirable affects on flavour, colour and some of the general properties of the juices. Some manufacturers produce unpasteurized juices in an attempt to meet the current trends for more 'natural' products. These rely on a low bacteria count to begin with and using refrigeration to retard microorganism growth. These juices generally have a higher risk of microbial contamination but some consumers feel it is of better quality because it is 'natural'. It is the consumer's choice about which type they drink as if it is unpasteurized it has to be labeled so ().
Juice is naturally cloudy, particularly apple juice. This is mostly due to the presence of collected cell tissue, constituents and complexes which are held in solution by pectin material. When producing cloudy apple juices, preventative measures must be taken to stabilize the colloid. When producing clear apple juice, Pectinases such as Pectin X and Peelzym can be added to break down the pectin which releases the cell tissues and constituents present in the juice. Apples have a high pectin content and alcohol can be used to precipitate it out of solution and to monitor enzyme treatment (Background information in practical booklet).
There are many clearing agents that can be used to help clarify fruit juice. Starch can also add to the haze as it has the ability to form complexes with the polyphenols. In processing, amylase can be added to digest the starch. The fruit juice can be tested with iodine to ensure the starch has been eliminated. By removing the starch this can help to reduce the haze.
Proteins can also form complexes with polyphenols. With the addition of more protein, the complex formation can be sped up and sedimentation occurs so the complexes can be removed. Bentonite is natural clay from volcanic origin. It binds with any excess protein and removes it ().
The polyphenols can also be precipitated out of solution by the addition of gelatin. This can prevent browning and off flavours occurring.
Some producers of fruit juice will also add sulphur dioxide which prevents further browning reactions taking place. This is a permitted preservative and is usually added as sulphite or metabisulphite (RK Proudlove 2001).
The process shown in the diagram of complex brown polymers being created is prevented by adding sulfite. It acts as a reducing agent and combines with the o-quinone to convert it back to diphenol which is colourless and therefore reduces browning. It can also retard oxidation, and improve storage life, which are all very desirable features. However it is very important that this is a controlled process as too much SO 2 can give food an unpleasant smell. There are regulations set in place for the addition of sulphur dioxide at 350ppm for fruit juice.
9.46kg of apples were weighed and washed and pressed to get the juice. See practical manual. 2.84kg of juice was collected and 100ml of juice was poured into each of four containers and labeled as unpasteurized. The remaining apple juice was then pasteurized. The juice was brought up to 74C and held for one minute before being cooled with ice to bring the temperature down as quickly as possible. 100ml of the pasteurized juice was then added to each of 11 containers. Added to these were:
To the different unpasteurized samples, sodium metabisulphite, ascorbic acid and citric acid were added, and one was left as a control.
The apple juice was then tested for pectin using alcohol, starch using iodine, sugar with a refractometer and acidity using pH and a titration. The same tests were also used on some freshly squeezed lemon, orange and grapefruit juice, and for comparison on commercial orange and grapefruit juice.
There was no commercial apple juice available to compare the freshly pressed apple juice with.
Yield of apple juice:
Apples used = 9.46kg
Juice obtained= 2.84kg
The approximate yield of apple juice was 30%. This is a fairly inaccurate yield as due to time restrictions the juice was weighed when there was enough to examine, rather than when it had finished being pressed. The food composition tables state that apples have an approximate water content of 85% so in reality the yield should have been higher.
The anti browning agents added to the unpasteurized samples did have much of an affect on the haze of the juice but it can be seen that they did prevent browning to a certain extent. Citric acid resulted in an orange colour in the apple juice while the ascorbic acid and sodium metabisulphite resulted in a yellow colour. Compared to the control sample they all had an affect on the browning of the juice but it is difficult to conclude which is favorable. The sample which had ascorbic acid added to it had a lot of mould growth on the surface of the liquid but that could be due to the juice not being pasteurized. In commercial fruit juice production it is common to use ascorbic acid as an anti browning agent.
When examining the selection of different freshly squeezed and commercial fruit juices it can be seen that only the apple juice appears to contain pectin. Alcohol was used to precipitate the pectin out of solution. A positive result is obtained when the pectin can be seen to have precipitated out, although it was quite difficult to see the effect. Apple juice gave a positive result while the other juices appeared to give a negative result. Apple is known to be rich in pectin while the other fruits used; grapefruit, lemon and orange, the main pectin source is in the peel which is not involved in this process.
The apple juice also gave a positive result for starch when tested with iodine. This may show that starch is contributing to the cloudiness of the fruit juice as it was hazy, although the haziness can be caused by many factors so it is difficult to identify the main cause. It was not possible to make a comparison with commercial clear apple juice as there was none available. It would have been interesting to see if there was starch still present in the clear apple juice as this would show that starch can be present without contributing to the clarity. The other fruits showed negative results for starch.
The pH of the freshly squeezed and commercial orange juice is very similar indicating that processing does not have much of an affect on the pH of this juice. The commercial grapefruit juice is very slightly more acidic than the freshly squeezed but there is not a major difference. The lemon juice is more acidic than the other citrus fruits which can be expected but interestingly the apple juice has a lower pH than the orange and grapefruit juices. The low pH could be because cooking apples were used and they are slightly more acidic than eating apples. When producing apple juice commercially it is beneficial for the apples to be sweeter in flavour, and so the type of apple and point of ripening is important. The sweeter they are then there is less need for adding sugar or sweeteners instead will give a naturally sweet taste.
The total solids content was examined using a refractometer. The most interesting result was between the commercial and freshly squeezed grapefruit juices. The commercial juice had a total solids content of 10% while the fresh juice had only a 3% content. There did not appear to be an obvious difference in clarity and if there had been time it would have been good to do the readings again to make sure they were accurate. An expected result would be that after processing the juice would have a lower total solids content than it started off with, especially if clearing agents had been added. When comparing these juices though, it must be taken into consideration that they have different origins. They were probably made using different types of the fruit and could originate from different countries, with different compositions of sugars for example. Both the freshly squeezed and commercial orange juice show a similar total solids contents while the apple juice sample gives a reading lower than this.
All of the clearing agents resulted in a high clarity except for Peelzym which still had a slight haze even at 0.3ml. It could be possible that more is needed for the best result, but pectin x which is also a pectic enzyme appears to give a more effective end result with less enzyme used. In practice this would be beneficial as it would probably be more cost effective to use less enzyme. All of the samples with clearing agents, and the control sample, have sediment at the bottom. This is the cell tissue, constituents, material that was suspended in solution all collected at the bottom of the container. It is interesting that the control sample was also translucent while the unpasteurized control sample was still cloudy. This shows that pasteurization has a big effect on the stability of the colloidal matter the juice originally has. Enzymes are used to break down the colloidal system and it appears that heat treatment can also contribute towards this.
There are a few key steps for ensuring a safe final product. When picking fruit, mouldy parts should be discarded as this could cause contamination with mycotoxins. The juice can be pasteurized preferably at 74C for 1 minute. This is HTST which means the juice will reach a high enough temperature to greatly reduce the number of bacteria but it will not be held for so long that the properties of the juice will be greatly altered. Although pasteurization does not sterilize the juice, it brings the levels of microorganisms down to a safe level. Fruit juice that is not shelf stable should also be kept refrigerated to minimize microorganism growth after processing. Once opened shelf stable juices should also be kept refrigerated.
There are also key steps that should be taken to ensure high quality. When picking fruit to be used for making fruit juice, the type and quality are important and have a large effect on the final product. Fruit should be sound and of good quality and mouldy parts discarded as these can taint the flavour. For clear juices a selection of clearing agents can be used and anti browning enzymes added to preserve the colour and create a desirable clarity. These must be permitted types and added within the stated legal regulations for quantity.