To examine pasteurisation, separation and homogenisation of milk and to look at the effects on the consequent products.
Pasteurisation is a heat treatment used on foods and is most commonly associated with liquids. The aim is to kill vegetative pathogens with minimal effects on the nutritional content, sensory characteristics and physical properties. It also has the advantage of extending shelf life although does not achieve any degree of sterility. The mild thermal process is effective at inactivating spoilage organisms and vegetative pathogens although some microorganisms such as spore formers could be activated. During storage refrigeration is necessary to limit growth (Lewis & Heppell 2000).
For milk, the unit of pasteurisation is a hold of 72C for 15 seconds using the HTST process. This was first defined as necessary to remove pathogens Mycobacterium tuberculosis and brucellosis but also removes many other pathogens such as Salmonella and Campylobacter (Heldman & Hartel 1997)HeHHhhasisidncclv.
HTST pasteurisation is a continuous flow process, while there is also batch processing which is carried out with a unit of pasteurisation equivalent to holding at 63C for 30 minutes. Batch processes are generally less efficient and less cost effective, so in commercial food processing continuous processing is more desirable (Proudlove 2001).
Milk is often separated to gain skim milk and cream. Commercially, it usually is carried out as a continuous process by centrifugation which is a process that relies on the differences in the size and density of the different particles present. The fast movement will cause light and heavy particles to move apart from each other and allows for the mixture to become separated (London South Bank University 2004).
Milk is also often homogenized to stabilize the fat. During this process, as well as the water, the fat must also be in liquid form. This is achieved above 45C for dairy fat so the milk is heated and then homogenized at high pressure to reduce and disperse the fat globules creating a stable emulsion (Proudlove 2001).
The HTST pasteurizer involves milk being pumped from a silo into the first stage of the process; the regeneration section. Here returning milk that has already been heated is pumped past the raw cold milk in on opposite sides of a plate heat exchanger. The heat is transferred from the hot milk, and so it cools down, into the raw milk which heats up. This allows for heat recovery and a more efficient system.
The milk is then separated into cream and skim milk by centrifugation. The metal plates have three evenly spaced holes, with 120 between them so balance is maintained. They are stacked onto the cone centre and a coat is put on top of the whole structure. There are two holes, one for the cream to exit by, and one for the skim milk. It is then connected to the separation section of the pasteurisation machine and is spun to separate the milk which enters after the regeneration stage. The lighter skim milk runs down the plates and is collected and pumped back for the next stage of pasteurisation while the cream becomes concentrated inside the centrifuge and is run off into a bucket.
The skim milk enters the second stage of pasteurisation and is heated to 72C before entering the holding tube for 15 seconds. There is a temperature sensor which is used to ensure the milk had reached the correct point, if not the milk is redirected and will have to go through the machine again. If it is at the correct temperature the milk enters the cooling section and loses heat to the raw milk entering. It is then further cooled using chilled water bring the temperature right down.
The cream is then homogenized to evenly disperse and stabilize the fat globules. Once the cream is warmed to convert the milk fat into the liquid phase, this process can be carried out in a three-piston homogenizer which breaks down the fat globules under pressure and disperses them in the liquid milk phase that is present.
Water was first pumped through the pasteurisation system and the various temperatures recorded, as for the milk. The raw milk was then pumped through the system and separated by the connecting centrifuge. The cream was collected in a bucket. The skim milk continued through the pasteurizing system.
10kg cream was then mixed with 15kg skim milk and was warmed to 50C. This was then homogenized at different pressures and the viscosity examined using a Brookfield Viscometer. A sample was also taken for analysis along with a raw milk, a raw skim milk, and a pasteurized skim milk sample. The freezing point depression was determined for raw milk and pasteurized skim milk.
The flow time was also determined using a flow cup for the homogenized cream/skim milk mixture.
Thermal Efficiency (TE) of the HTST Process
See attached sheet A
Flow Properties of Liquids in the Heat Exchanger
See attached sheet B
Reynolds Number and Residence Times for Water and Milk
See attached sheet C
Analysis in the Control Laboratory of Fat, Protein, Lactose and Alkaline phosphatase
See attached sheet D table 1
Viscosity of Cream Homogenized at Different Pressures using the Brookfield Viscometer
See attached sheet D table 2 and graphs following
Freezing Point Depression of Raw Milk and Pasteurized Skim Milk
See attached sheet D table 3
Determination of Flow Time by a Flow Cup
3 mm orifice used so kinematic viscosity is calculated:
See above graph 2 for plot of apparent viscosity versus homogenisation pressure
The thermal efficiency values for water and milk were calculated. This is also known as the regeneration efficiency and calculates how efficient a machine is at regenerating the energy. For water the TE value was 80.8%, much higher than the TE for milk which was 65.3%. This shows that for water, 80.8% of the energy needed will be supplied by regeneration and for milk 65.3%.
For milk, the value (
2 - 

1) is 41C and (
3 - 

4) is 54.3C. There is a difference between the two values because for the first part of the process, (
2 - 

1), there is a larger total volume of milk as there is cream and skim milk present. The cream is then removed so the total volume is reduced and so there is an increased heat transfer.
For water the values for (
2 - 

1) and (
3 - 

4) were 51C and 49.6C respectively. There is only a difference of 1.4C whereas with milk there was a difference of 13.3C. The differences for the two liquids are not the same because water remains at a constant volume so the heat transfer for the two stages is also constant, while the volume of milk is reduced so there is a difference.
The volumetric flow rate is calculated to be larger for water at 1.10 x 10 -4 m 3s -1 than it is for milk at 9.88 x 10 -5 m 3s -1. This is expected as milk has components which will restrict volumetric flow rate compared with pure water.
The Reynolds number for water is calculated as 16000 and for skim milk as 8147. The Reynolds number determines whether the flow is laminar or turbulent. Laminar flow is dominated by viscosity forces and the flow is parabolic. Turbulent flow is dominated by inertial forces and produces random eddies. For both liquids, the flow is said to be turbulent as the numbers are above 4000. This means that the velocity will fluctuate randomly through the flow at any point but there will not be as much variation throughout the pipe as there would be if the flow was laminar. For laminar flow the velocity at the centre is at the maximum and at the wall is zero. This can cause a wide range of distribution times and means that the fluid at the centre will spend less time in the tube and the fluid at the wall will spend longer in the tube. When looking at residence time in the holding tube and the safety and quality of the end product, turbulent flow is better than laminar as there is a smaller distribution of residence time.
The mean and minimum residence times were calculated for water and milk. The average residence time for water was 22.2 s and the minimum was 18.4 s. For milk the average was 25 s and the minimum was 20.8 s. All of these figures ensure that the fluid remains in the holding tube for the minimum required time of 15 s.
The milk components were looked at for raw milk, raw skim milk and pasteurized skim milk using the dairylab. The fat for the cream for homogenizing was also looked at. The results showed that the fat content was reduced from 3.42% to 0.22% between raw milk and pasteurized skim milk. This is due to the separation process which removed a lot of the fat as cream. It was then raised to 10.63% when the cream for homogenizing was made up which was a mix of 10kg cream and 15kg skim milk. It would have been good to also examine the fat content of the cream ex pasteurizer to look at how it compared with the diluted cream for homogenizing and how accurate the analysis from the dairylab was. The protein and lactose contents showed a slight reduction.
The viscosity of the homogenized cream was examined with a Brookfield viscometer. The results show variation and not very consistent trends. The Brookfield viscometer does not give particularly accurate results and this was discovered while taking the measurements. On reflection it appears that a spindle type 1 should possibly have been used for the first few readings of each sample to give a higher reading as the majority were very low and made it very difficult to read. A method had to be adopted to depress the clamp when the needle was pointing in the centre of the visible screen because the result varied if it was clamped at one edge or the other. For some of the low speeds, no reading was gained which leaves it difficult to see the trend on the graph. It does appear however, that as the milk was homogenized under higher pressure, the apparent viscosity was increased. The second graph showing the homogenisation pressure versus apparent viscosity at spindle speed 20 also shows this. A more accurate viscometer would be a capillary flow viscometer.
The determination of flow time using a flow cup showed that the milk homogenized at higher pressures had a longer flow time. This is due to the viscosity being increased as the cream is homogenized at higher pressures. The more viscous the product, the longer the flow time. Graph 2 shows a comparison between the apparent viscosity at spindle speed 20 using the Brookfield viscometer and when using the flow cup with a 3mm orifice. The apparent viscosity appears to be a lot lower when using the flow cup method but this is possibly because the method is more accurate. Both follow the same trend that as the cream is homogenized at a higher pressure, the apparent viscosity increases.
The freezing point depression for raw milk and pasteurized skim milk were determined to be -0.53C and -0.49C respectively. These figures show the freezing point of the samples and show a slight increase in freezing point for the pasteurized skim milk. This is likely to be due to there being higher water content in the treated milk, as fat has been removed.
The processes of pasteurisation, separation and homogenisation are detailed and there are many aspects to examine in the final products. The changes and effects the processes cause are important especially when the milk is being produced commercially, so control over, and being able to predict the outcome is necessary.