The aim is to be able to establish the number of living bacteria in a foodstuff and to know how to select an appropriate method for enumerating bacteria.
Total counts and viable counts of bacteria can be taken when looking enumerating bacteria. The methods used in this experiment are looking at the viable count which only looks at the living cells present.
For the pour plate using melted PCA, the only countable plates were the 10 -6 dilution samples. This shows that there were more bacteria present than anticipated and more diluted samples would have given a lower count and may have been more accurate. The colony count for this part of the experiment gave a mean of 277. When comparing this with the class mean of 378, there is a clear difference. The class results are likely to be more accurate as a whole because there were more samples which can even out error. The class results give a much smaller 95% confidence limit as a percent value due to the larger amount of duplications and the effects this has in finding a more accurate result.
The spread plate also used PCA agar but gave a higher colony count. This is possibly due to the method used, as the same dilutions were spread on the plates. Pour plates may cause less growth to occur as organisms under the agar may not have sufficient oxygen. It is also possible that there were small colonies under the agar that were not counted, as it is more difficult to clearly identify them when they are suspended.
The VRBGA pour plate used was selective for Enterobacteriaceae and inhibits growth of certain other bacteria. The colonies were purple/pink in colour and some had halo's around the colony. This is caused by the glucose present in the medium being converted to acid, and the bile salts in the medium precipitate away from this. The colonies of 0.5mm or more were counted. Due to poor mixing the 10 -4 dilution could not be counted as the colonies were all grouped together but the 10 -3 plate gave a sufficient count. Comparing the individual results for this against the class results, it can be seen that a very low colony count was obtained. The average class colony count was over three times more. This could have occurred because the agar was at too a high temperature when the sample was first added and may have killed some of the bacteria cells. This is where the precision of class results shows, due to there being more duplicate plates, anomalies are leveled out.
The MPN test is selective for coliforms. If coliforms are present they grow and produce acid from the glucose in the medium which can cause a colour change to a more yellow colour. Gas is also produced which can be seen as a gas bubble in a Durham tube. For the individual results, the Durham tubes in every bottle showed a gas bubble. The high number of positive tubes for the presumptive coliform count by the MPN method, shows that there were more coliforms present than expected. There was no benefit in this case to work out the MPN as it wouldn't demonstrate anything to us. The class results show a wide variety in the results and give a most probable number between 75 and 11000 of coliforms which is a broad range and does not appear to be very accurate. This is not generally an accurate method.
When a colony count is referred to as a total viable count, from the name it is assumed that each colony is formed by a single living organism and by counting the number of colonies will give the number of viable cells present. Sometimes cell clumping can occur and pairs, chains or clusters of cells will form a colony instead. When referred to as colony counts or colony forming units the allowances for this occurrence are incorporated in the name as it does not assume that each colony is formed by a single cell, instead addresses them as units.
20 colonies on a spread plate from 0.1ml of the 10 -1 homogenate
So in 1ml there are 200 colonies
So the lowest level of contamination is 2000 bacteria per 10g, 200 in 1g of mince
A pour plate has an advantage of achieving a good mix of the bacteria. For aerobes the results could be affected in a pour plate, as the bacteria present at the base of the plate will get less oxygen than those on the surface. This could be a disadvantage as the growth can appear to be at a lower level and not give a true count. Only viable counts can be achieved for pour plate and spread plate methods as only the living bacteria can form colonies
The number of duplications has a big effect on the precision of a count; the more plates then the more precise the results are. This can be seen when comparing the results for pour plate melted PCA individual (using two duplications) and class results (using 9 duplications), the 95% confidence limits as a percent were much smaller for the class results indicating that they were more precise.
The larger the count of bacteria, the more precise the results are too which can be seen when comparing the individual counts for melted PCA and VRGBA. The PCA had a colony count of 277 and a 95% confidence limit of 8.3% and the VRGBA had a much smaller colony count of 39.5 and the 95% confidence limit was much higher at 22%.
Enterobacteriaceae are gram negative rod shaped bacteria. They are a large family including E.coli and Salmonella and normally inhabit the intestines. They are facultive anaerobes and can be grown on violet red bile glucose agar as they ferment glucose. Coliforms are also gram negative bacteria and are aerobes and facultive anaerobes. They are found in human and animal faeces, and within the environment such as in the soil and vegetation. They are oxidase negative.
The term presumptive count refers to the colony count but as it is not known whether all the colonies are the organism trying to be isolated, the count is only presumptive.
Tests can be carried out to identify the growth such as gram staining and examination under the microscope, looking for gram negative rod shaped bacteria in the case of the Enterobacteriaceae, and also looking for gram negative when looking at the coliforms. Coliforms and Enterobacteriaceae are also oxidase negative and so can be identified from oxidase positive bacteria using this test. Enterobacteriaceae ferment glucose and so the oxidation fermentation test can be used to see if the colonies ferment glucose. There are many tests that can be carried out to confirm that the colonies and growth are Enterobacteriaceae and coliforms.
.