The company had made a decision to stop using coconut oil as an ingredient and replace it with palm oil. This was because the price of coconut oil was too high and palm oil was a cheaper alternative. However, palm oil has a faster rate of oxidation than coconut oil and so we needed to investigate how to store the oil and how long we could keep it. The way to do this would be to obtain a peroxide value over life.
My task was to make it possible for daily samples to be tested for a peroxide value so that we could observe how this changes over time.
To complete this task I would need to liase with several different people both within and out side the business. I made a plan of all the things I would need to do so that I would have something to focus on.
We are unable to do peroxide testing and so I would need to contact the palm oil supplier to see if they would be able to complete the tests for us. I was able to get the information from the development department who informed me who it would be best to contact (Team work). I then proceeded to email the palm oil supplier with details of our objectives and situation. I was then put in contact with the correct person who I spoke with on the telephone. This way we were able to get the information we needed more quickly (Communication). The supplier was able to do the testing so I then asked for details on how to prepare the samples, how much they would require and where to send them. I asked of this could all be confirmed by email so that I would have a copy of the information (Business awareness).
I then had to inform the Tanker Bay staff what I would be doing. I had already been given the delivery date from the logistics team. I decided to email the Tanker Bay team as they tended to work when I was not in. I asked if they could inform me of which tanks the palm oil was being put in to. I also requested that they left one of the tanks until last before the oil in it was used. I received confirmation that they would do this for me so that I could get daily samples from the same tank (Team work, communication).
Once I had confirmation that the palm oil had been delivered, I was able to start collecting samples. The tanks can hold up to 9 tonnes and have to be reached via a platform. I asked a member of the QA team to assist me with the first collection so that I would know what to do for the rest of the week (Team work). I was shown what equipment to use and where to find it. We made our way to the tanker bay and I was shown how to open the tanks and how to take a sample using a long handled ladle. From then on, I was able to collect the daily samples by myself. I had to monitor the tanks and check that the one I wanted to use wasn't being emptied. I also aimed to get the samples at the same time each day. (Planning & organisation)The oil had to be placed in a sample pot with as little air as possible to prevent oxidation. To prevent this even further, I placed the samples in the freezer and stored them there.
After collecting a week's worth of samples, I needed to send them to the oil supplier for testing. I arranged for the samples to be sent by courier so that I could pack them in dry ice and keep from oxidising during transit. To do this, I had to liase with the secretary for her to arrange the courier. Once I had a time for the courier to come and get my samples, I packed them up using dry ice and polystyrene.
The results were faxed back to me. As soon as I received these, I presented them on a spreadsheet and emailed it to the QA manager and the other people involved in the palm oil project (Communication, information technology). From this a decision could be made about how long the palm oil could be stored for before its peroxide value was too high and caused it to be rancid.
The peroxide values gave us an indication of how long palm oil could be stored before it turned rancid. This information could be used by logistics and planning when considering the production and shelf life of products.