Despite Tsountas' excavations in the early twentieth century, major foreign excavation projects in the 1960s and Theocharis' work in the 1970s, the Aegean Neolithic has not received as much scholarly attention as it would seem fitting or indeed deserving. Exchange and specialised production, or craft specialisation as commonly known, have to some extent been emphasised as significant attributes thus projecting the Neolithic into its rightful importance. This has been particularly so since exchange and craft specialisation have implications for the organisation of time and labour and consequently these have been associated with the beginnings of social differentiation. As Renfrew has pointed out (1973: 179, 187), the Neolithic should not be equated only with simple farming communities since there was long-distance trade and craft specialisation in obsidian, Spondylus and textiles. Furthermore, Theocharis (1973: 60), in a social evolutionary mindset, has interpreted the increased standardisation of tools and the large amounts of Melian obsidian in Middle Neolithic Thessaly as indicators of "stabilisation and improvement".
When using primary material regarding the Aegean Neolithic, a number of limitations emerge in the definition of evidence per se. A certain amount of information from early excavations has been lost. For example, Petrakis (2002: 51, 75) regrets the disappearance of stone and bone finds from Blegen's 1928 excavation at Ayioryitika in the Peloponnese with only Blegen's notebooks remaining today. In addition, there have been delays in the publication of final reports from major excavations (e.g., Renfrew and Slater, 2003) hindering further critical evaluation, while, as Souvatzi (2000: 208) remarks, no large-scale exposure of Neolithic settlements is available anywhere in Greece. The question that subsequently arises from these shortcomings is the validity of the evidence available in enabling one to account for and evaluate exchange and craft specialisation. This essay, therefore, will take a factual approach with the objective to assess critically the archaeological evidence available to date and associated interpretations. Thus, this essay does not only examine the type of evidence, but also how good this is for facilitating our understanding of exchange and craft specialisation.
Exchange has traditionally been investigated using characterisation studies, which examine the distance from raw material sources and the geographical spread of a given type of artefact. While the current essay will draw from such analyses it should be noted, however, that these could still be failing to show that even for contemporaneous artefacts different exchange mechanisms may well be accountable for similar patterns of distribution. Craft specialisation bears numerous definitions, but in a general sense it has been linked to (technical) expertise that is not otherwise widely shared. This working definition will be used in the current essay to discuss artefacts made by 'specialists' with the intention to be exchanged.
Perls' (1992: 135) four parameters for assessing both exchange and craft specialisation provide a comprehensive framework upon which I would like to draw for the purposes of structuring the factual content of this essay. The areas to be examined therefore are: a) skill and complexity in production techniques; b) distribution of production centres; c) volume of output; and d) circulation of artefacts beyond the original production areas. Admittedly, there is a certain economical bias in this framework but the main reasons for adhering to it are simplicity and brevity. It should be noted that evidence relating to craft specialisation will be considered prior to discussing evidence for exchange.
While it is highly plausible that specialised production and exchange also pertained to many perishable goods (e.g., wood, hides and tapestry) and to artefacts which have not been analysed from this perspective (e.g., symbolic artefacts such as figurines, house models and miniature vases, see Perls, 2001: 256), this essay will focus on stone assemblages, ceramics and rare goods since these are the three categories which have attracted predominantly most interest. The ensuing discussion examines almost exclusively 'artefacts', rather than any other classes of evidence such as settlement patterns or architecture which may also be informative of how social and economic relations were organised and how these impacted on exchange and craft specialisation. To encompass these as well in the discussion and do justice to a more comparative analysis is beyond the scope of the present essay.
Furthermore, regarding "Neolithic artefacts", the broad chronological divisions of Early Neolithic (EN), Middle Neolithic (MN), Late Neolithic (LN) and Final Neolithic (FN) will be used throughout. The term "Aegean" will not be rigidly defined geographically and reference will be made to both island and mainland sites.
This essay aims to argue that although at first instance there is strong evidence for craft specialisation and exchange, on closer inspection a number of irreconcilable ambiguities become apparent. These include some of the following: speculative interpretations, such as the itinerant knappers model; the problematic archaeological visibility of export workshops; the lack of specificity about exchange mechanisms, which consequently converts the term 'exchange' into a generic rather than specifically applied one; and the considerable temporal and spatial variations encountered across the Aegean, which impede any broad generalisations, and await resolution from further research. Finally, as it will be concluded, despite these ambiguities the case for craft specialisation and exchange during the Neolithic is not irretrievably weakened. On the contrary, these limitations necessitate a non-economic and non-technological deterministic appreciation of the social dynamics of Neolithic societies and in this context there is sufficiently good evidence for exchange and craft specialisation.
There appears to be largely a one-sided treatment of stone assemblages as exemplified by Perls, simply because no other lithics expert has looked at the evidence or raised alternative views.
With regards to the skill and complexity in production techniques, stone tools in the EN and MN made from distant rather than local raw materials show considerable sophistication in production (pressure or indirect percussion flaking) and virtually no errors. These finds provide convincing evidence for specialised production (Perls, 1992: 133, 136; Demoule and Perls, 1993: 384; Perls, 2001: 208; Elster, 1994: 173). However, one could question Perls' (1992: 137) interpretation of the technical and stylistic homogeneity in stone artefacts found all over Greece as the result of a small number of specialists. This uniformity could have been underpinned by cultural or social norms eventually followed by an increase in the number of specialists. It is also possible that future research challenges the extent of this alleged uniformity.
Perls further asserts that there was considerable know-how in maritime travel to Melos to procure obsidian which was beyond the capabilities of EN and MN Thessalian farmers at a time when the Cyclades were not settled yet (Perls, 1992: 144-145; Demoule and Perls, 1993: 384; Perls, 2001: 207). Besides, raw material sources were exploited using specific skills such as quarrying for honey-flints (Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 100). Both of these points and the associated model of specialist itinerant knappers acting as suppliers of lithics to many different places (Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 97) may be seen as tentative scenarios rather than conclusive evidence. How credible is Perls' model when in the absence of social hierarchies (Perls, 2001: 299-300) a few individuals, in addition to their agricultural duties, had such a wide range of capabilities and responsibilities (travel, procurement, preparation of modules, further travel, knapping and distribution)? Moreover, as argued below, the archaeological invisibility of intermediate workshops and the lack of precision about the exact exchange strategies challenge the viability of just one rigidly defined model of specialised supply.
In the LN and FN there was a considerable fall in the level of craftsmanship indicating a process of "de-specialisation" and evidence of direct procurement of obsidian which is found in raw form in southern Greek sites (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 393, 401-402; Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 97). This contrast between the earlier and later Neolithic highlights the absence of an evolutionary trend or cumulative effect entailing increased craft specialisation and associated exchange.
Regarding the distribution of production centres, the observation that stone artefacts reached various villages in the EN and MN as partially or fully developed tools (flint blades or obsidian cores) and not as raw material has logically given rise to arguments about a few localised production centres near the raw material sources (Perls, 1992: 128, 136-137; Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 97). Although the operation of such specialised centres remains a possibility, their archaeological visibility appears to be problematic. The EN site of Agios Petros on an islet in the Northern Sporades yielded large amounts of Melian obsidian which could suggest that Agios Petros served as an intermediary site and exported obsidian to Thessaly. Efstratiou (1985: 74) though reinterpreted the alleged obsidian workshop identified by Theocharis at Agios Petros as the in situ debris from just one core. If the ceramic affinities identified by Efstratiou (1985: 135) are correct, then Agios Petros could have maintained contacts not only with Thessaly but also with Southern Balkans and the Anatolian coast and it would be too simplistic to assume that the islet acted solely as a stop for travelling technologists or suppliers.
Although obsidian reached the various settlements in different states of completeness in the LN and FN, Perls (1992:128) has continued to support the operation of workshops citing an alleged workshop at LN Saliagos, near Antiparos. However, one of the early accounts of the Saliagos excavation mentions the recovery of two large roughed-out cores (Renfew and Evans, 1968: 266) but does not interpret it as a workshop. Moreover, it would appear environmentally deterministic to equate any raw material sources with localised workshops. Yali is a small islet in the Dodecanese with natural obsidian. However, in the FN settlement at Yali, there was no evidence of mining or knapping the Yali obsidian although there were Melian obsidian tools. This hints at some possible ad-hoc collection of Yali obsidian by incoming travellers rather than systematic or organised exploration (Sampson, 1988: 257-259). It is also interesting to note that the intensified sea-faring in the FN did not result in more specialised exploitation or export in the case of Yali.
Concerning the volume of output, the even distribution of obsidian and honey-flints across different EN and MN settlements has been interpreted as a stable production of stone artefacts sustained by part-time specialists (Perls, 1992: 141; Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 97; Perls, 2001: 209). However, it is possible that Perls is generalising across a large geographical area whereas future research could reveal more inter-site variability.
Regarding the circulation of lithics beyond the original production centres, from the EN there is clear evidence of long-distance circulation of obsidian and flint tools, andesite millstones, polished celts and chisels (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 384).
Since exotic raw materials such as obsidian, flint and jasper all came from different sources, which were also located far away from each other, they are more likely to have been acquired through exchange rather than direct procurement (Perls, 2001: 207; Perls, 1992: 125). Although this argument at first instance appears convincing, one cannot rule out direct procurement as it is difficult, even for obsidian, to be specific about the exact exchange mechanisms.
Renfew (1973: 185) has suggested that Melian obsidian was exchanged from one village to another (i.e., down-the-line trade), whereas Perls, as already mentioned, formulated the model of itinerant knappers. Both suggestions can be seen as attempts to address what Torrence (1986: 94, 97) calls the surprising absence of research in Aegean obsidian exchange mechanisms despite the extensive obsidian characterisation studies. Similarly, although it can be accepted that the colonisation of the Cyclades in the LN meant increased sea-faring to Melos, with the Cycladic settlements possibly playing a role in obsidian acquisition and supply to outsiders (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 393; Broodbank, 2000: 157-158), one cannot be precisely accurate about the exact trade, exchange or procurement strategies and the extent to which these were organised by specialists.
It is quite possible that obsidian has received too much academic attention although it has neither been the most prominent artefact material nor an exclusive indicator of long-distance contacts. Elster (1994: 171-173), in analysing the stone assemblages of EN Achilleion in Thessaly, notes that the quantity and size of obsidian tools were relatively small. Torrence (1986: 219) stresses that obsidian procurement throughout the Neolithic was coupled with other activities (e.g., fishing) so that the labour and time investment in obsidian acquisition was not directly proportional to the distance from sources. In LN Sitagroi in Macedonia obsidian played just a minimal role in the flaked stone assemblage but the inhabitants of Sitagroi did engage in long-distance procurement or exchange as demonstrated by the honey-brown flints which were derived from North East Bulgaria (Tringham, 2003: 83-84). It would also seem necessary to accommodate for flexible and varied exchange modalities. As Dimitriadis and Skourtopoulou (2003:131) argue, different LN settlements in the Serres Basin relied heavily on local stone sources in contrast to sites in the Drama Basin, such as Sitagroi, where long-distance exchange co-existed with considerable reliance on local stone sources.
With respect to the skill and complexity of techniques in pottery production, there was only limited technological know-how in the EN. Due to the low number of different shapes, the small size of vessels, the simple building technology, the low firing temperature and the resulting crude and coarse wares in sites such as Sesklo, Achilleion and Franchthi (Wijnen, 1982: 24, 28; Bjrk, 1994: 113-114; Demoule and Perls, 1993: 377; Vitelli, 1995: 59-60), it has been argued rather convincingly that there were no full-time specialist potters (Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 101).
There have been suggestions though that EN potters had restricted knowledge of plants and clays and of recipes similar to those used by shamans. The underlying link between magic and fire control in pottery production has been seen in conjunction with the alleged ritual use of early pottery to strengthen the argument for specialised know-how (Vitelli, 1995: 61-62; Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 102-103; Bjrk 1994:113). It appears though, that the ritual function of EN vessels has been over-emphasised in order to strengthen the case for specialised production. Kotsakis (2003: 376) questions whether the absence of EN cooking pots as attested at Sesklo, Achilleion and Franchthi is a ubiquitous phenomenon in the Aegean Neolithic. Furthermore, Yiouni (1996: 190) concluded that EN pots from Nea Nikomedeia were capable of withstanding cooking and firing stress.
The variety in fabrics, innovation, elegance, well-finished surfaces, difficult shapes and individualised decoration of MN vessels strongly suggests sophisticated local specialisation in production. However, the underlying complex techniques remained relatively uniform, at least in the Peloponnese (Phelps, 2004: 64-65; Vitelli, 1995: 55-56). The increased complexity in decoration and variation in styles and building/firing techniques of LN pottery signifies specialised production not only on the basis of technical skill but also due to considerable time investment (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 392). In both instances it would appear that specialised production was socially more important in terms of style rather than technology. This could be taken to indicate that craft specialisation was not supply-driven (i.e., by the specialist potters) but demand-driven according to the needs of Neolithic communities. As Perls and Vitelli (1999: 101) emphasise, craft specialisation was underpinned by social and cultural choice rather than technical prerequisites.
The FN has yielded coarse wares and extensive variation in shapes supporting the argument for a large number of non-specialist potters (Vitelli, 1995: 58). Therefore, the strong case for specialised production in the MN and LN may be seen as non-teleological but somehow being reversed in the FN.
With reference to the distribution of pottery production centres, as it emerges from chemical and mineralogical analyses, pottery production throughout the Neolithic was village-based (Perls, 1992: 150) exploiting local clays without this necessarily implying the production of a single pottery style per village. The various stylistic groups of LN fine-decorated pottery in Thessaly consisting of a number of clay compositions indicate multiple production centres for one style (Schneider et al, 1994: 66).
As far as the volume of output is concerned, there have been different annual estimates. Vitelli (1995: 60) suggested that only 12 or 13 pots were made at EN Franchthi. For EN Nea Nikomedia though, Yiouni (1996: 184-185) has estimated that between 25 to 90 pots were produced. However, Yiouni herself admits that the estimate for the length of occupation (between 50 to 150 years) was based on comparing the stratigraphic depth to deposits in Thessaly rather than basing it on direct Nea Nikomedia evidence. In any case, the annual output does not appear to inform of an export industry in pottery.
Regarding the circulation of pottery beyond the original production areas, although the EN homogeneity in pottery has been interpreted as a reflection of open networks of relations without strict boundaries, there was very limited regional and almost no long-distance exchange in ceramics (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 377, 381; Perls, 2001: 220). However, Phelps (2004: 43) warns that the apparent similarity in EN pottery may be due to the lack of detailed excavation reports which could eventually inform of more inter-site stylistic variation. In other words, pottery homogeneity should not be taken as evidence for the lack of circulation, at least not without caution. Furthermore, Tomkins and Day (2001: 259) have examined EN pottery from Knossos in Crete using macroscopic analysis, petrography and scanning electron microscopy. The largest amount of pottery is indeed of local provenance but there is also pottery originating from north-central Crete and pottery whose provenance is unknown and could be off-island. Their findings show convincingly that local production cannot be taken for granted and that even the technically inferior EN vessels were exchanged over considerable distances.
Demoule and Perls (1993: 383) argue further that in the MN there was still limited exchange of pottery. Consistent with this argument Petrakis (2002: 78-79) claims to have singled out a distinctive MN Ayioryitika assemblage (Urfirnis vessels with pedant triangles as decoration) which supports the notion of a single production centre at Ayioryitika intended exclusively for local consumption. Although this may well have been the case, given the relatively small output from just one site, archaeologically it may be very difficult to recover such a sherd beyond Ayioryitika. Furthermore, if the regional and inter-regional MN pottery styles are to be taken as reflections of social interaction, exogamy and conflict-resolution strategies (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 383), then it is reasonable to assume that the integrative social function of pottery involved at least a small amount of pots changing hands.
For the LN, although there is evidence that some kinds of pottery, such as the grey-on-grey ware in Thessaly were circulated widely, it becomes increasingly problematic to distinguish between production and export from single or multiple centres (Perls, 1992: 137; Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 98; Schneider et al, 1994: 69). There is evidence that high quality painted LN pottery was exchanged between the neighbouring sites of Sesklo and Dimini (Kotsakis, 1996: 169) and this shows the importance of exchange at local level; a fact that is easily overseen as archaeologists are often fascinated by long-distance links. Following the chemical analysis of 31 sherds from LN Ftelia on Mykonos, pottery-production was found to be local, exploiting nearby clays and ochre, but 1 sherd was identified as an import from Saliagos (Aloupi, 2002: 280, 283-284). Again, this evidence would support regional rather than long-distance exchange of pottery.
Within the context of increased sea-faring and the formation of large pottery stylistic regions (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 398-399), there is again little evidence of pottery playing a role in long-distance exchange networks. Apart from a single imported scoop at FN Sesklo, there are no other imports and furthermore there is minimal stylistic similarity in ceramics between Thessaly, Euboea and Attica and no influence of Cycladic wares on mainland groups (Phelps, 2004: 121).
A wide range of artefacts can be classified as 'prestige items' including stone vases, marble pins and stamp seals (Perls, 2001: 222-223). The ensuing account focuses exclusively on shell ornaments and metal artefacts (copper, gold and silver).
With reference to skill and complexity of techniques, it remains unclear whether the manufacture of shell artefacts required specialist skills. Perls (2001: 223) has emphasised dexterity and patience while Miller (1996: 25-27) has shown through replication experiments that low skill was involved in the production of EN cockle shell beads at Franchthi. For LN Sitagroi, however, Nikolaidou (2003a: 334) has argued for skilled production of Spondylus ornaments.
One cannot attribute all metal objects appearing primarily in the LN and FN to specialist metalworkers. Native copper was collected and hammered like stone which implies that early metallurgy was not technologically revolutionary (Zachos, 1996a: 140, 142). At LN Sitagroi there have been small and simple artefacts such as pins, awls and beads which entailed simple shaping techniques and cold working (Renfew and Slater, 2003: 304-305). Even copper jewellery, beads, bracelets and pins were hammered and smoothed by burnishing as stone jewellery would have been produced (Zachos, 1996b: 167). However, bulk metal artefacts, such as FN axes from southern Greece, do appear to involve more complex production techniques (Nakou, 1995: 4; Zachos, 1996a: 143) which could probably indicate craft specialisation. Overall, however, the contrast and variety of technical investment noted between northern and southern Greece make it difficult to generalise about a coherent specialised metal 'industry' in the Neolithic Aegean.
As far as the distribution of production centres is concerned, at Franchthi Perls (1992: 130; 2001: 224, 226) has argued for an EN export workshop par excellence based on the paucity of finished cockle-shell beads, the manufacturing debris and the hundreds of small chert micro-points. Although Miller (1996: 23) drawing from ethnographic analogies has re-interpreted the manufacturing debris as a dump deposit, one would be inclined to agree with Perls because the chert tools stratigraphically and functionally related to the cockle-shell beads.
The whole settlement of Dimini has been seen as a specialised production centre. For Hourmouziadis (1979: 60, 94) the very construction of the Dimini enclosures served to demarcate space and organise the different workshops. Influenced by historical materialism, Hourmouziadis (1979: 89-90) envisioned an organised mass production system whereby lites supervised and controlled the production activities. Halstead (1993: 606-608) has challenged an earlier interpretation of craft specialisation of Spondylus ornaments and has suggested that the uneven concentration of finished Spondylus artefacts was the result of ritual deposition involving deliberate breakage and burning by socially differentiated households.
By comparing these finds with additional sites exhibiting Spondylus ornaments one may conclude that Hourmouziadis' and Halstead's scenarios of social differentiation are rather speculative. At LN Sitagroi the Spondylus and metal artefacts showed a non-restrictive distribution whereas the presence of damaged and burnt shell ornaments can be seen as a wider practice occurring at many more North Aegean sites (Nikolaidou, 2003a: 359, 340). It therefore appears reasonable to agree with Souvatzi (2000: 119-200) who emphasises that the area X8 at Dimini yielded tools appropriate for shell ornament manufacture, houses with manufacturing debris were abandoned, and the burning at Dimini pertained to whole structures rather than just to shell artefacts. While the uneven excavation at Dimini may have biased our existing understanding of artefact scatter, it would appear that Dimini played an important role in the Spondylus production and exchange network whereby craft specialisation occurred at community level (Andreou et al, 1996: 266; Kotsakis, 1996: 169).
Although there must have been separate production areas for metalworking, there does not appear to be clear archaeological evidence for such workshops. At Sitagroi, there have been sherds with copper deposits informing the presence of crucible melting for casting but there have been neither moulds, ingots or slag that could hint at large-scale metal production nor conclusive evidence for a furnace installation to withstand high temperatures (Renfrew and Slater, 2003: 303, 305-307, 315).
As far as the output of rare goods is concerned, the fact that Sitagroi revealed the largest quantity of Neolithic/Chalcolithic shell bracelets and amulets in the Aegean could be the result of wet and dry sieving employed at excavation (Nikolaidou, 2003a: 338) rather than convincing evidence of an export industry. The contemporaneous and closely located site of Paradeisos in Thrace yielded only three worked Spondylus remains and no Spondylus beads (Reese, 1987: 127-128) indicating that there was not a pan-Aegean imperative to organise shell production for export. The rarity of metal finds clearly suggests a very low production output (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 402).
Regarding the circulation of shell and metal artefacts these would appear to circulate in only small quantities over long distances (Perls and Vitelli, 1999: 99). The fact that Spondylus artefacts produced in the Aegean reached central Europe (Renfrew, 1973: 186) must not lead to generalisations about other kinds of rare goods.
Rare goods could not have easily changed hands since their rarity made them extremely valuable and as a consequence one is less likely to justify 'circulation' than 'exchange'. However, it becomes difficult to be in a position to specify the exact exchange mechanisms in operation. Although the similarity of the gold strip found at Zas cave on Naxos to the Varna culture seems to indicate connections between the Cyclades and the Balkans (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 403; Renfrew and Slater, 2003: 315), it remains unclear how such unique 'exotica' came to be acquired (Broodbank, 2000: 160) and whether these signified an intentional exchange in information between distant places as Nakou (1995: 6-7) asserts.
There are many uncertainties associated with the notion of circulation of metal either as raw material or as finished objects. Firstly, the nature of the evidence is problematic due to the possibility of recycling, the often questionable archaeological context of metal finds and the possible long history of circulation prior to deposition (Nakou, 1995: 4, 6, 21). Secondly, it is not always clear whether local or non local sources were exploited. For Broodbank (2000: 159) there is no conclusive evidence about the extent of exploitation of Cycladic metal sources despite the presence of FN sherds at the Siphnos mine and smelting debris at Kea. Renfrew and Slater (2003: 313, 317) also seem to favour the exploitation of local copper sources for Sitagroi although earlier scholars have identified multiple origins for the Sitagroi copper (the Balkans, the Cyclades, Lavrion, the Rhodope Mountains and Anatolia).
The above discussion demonstrates that the evidence for craft specialisation and exchange varies significantly according to the Neolithic phase in question and the category of artefact examined. The following points could be summarised at this stage: Although there is strong evidence for skilful knappers, at least in the EN and MN, the contested operation of specialised workshops at Agios Petros, Saliagos and Yali make it questionable whether supply and exchange were indeed specialised activities. The elaborate MN and LN pottery does appear to reflect specialised manufacture. As the analysis of EN pottery at Knossos revealed, more pottery was exchanged than was originally thought. Although the skill involved in the production of shell ornaments and metal artefacts varied, there are some good indications to date of specialised shell workshops at Franchthi and Dimini. In contrast to lithics and pottery, the exchange of rare goods would appear to be more directly linked to specialised production. While one seems to find long distance circulation of lithics and rare goods and some regional circulation of pottery, it is difficult to specify the exact exchange mechanisms for all three artefact categories.
Perls has generalised somewhat eagerly about the function of stone tools, pottery and rare goods and has argued for 'utilitarian', 'social' and 'prestige' exchange systems respectively (Perls 1992: 143-144, 149). Firstly, it remains questionable whether artefacts can be given a fixed functional characterisation. For example, even the highly elaborate LN Dimini pottery, which circulated regionally and could have been important in rituals, was used 'casually' as testified by its association with domestic contexts and its abundant and undifferentiated distribution within Dimini (Souvatzi, 2000: 104-105, 164, 211). Secondly, it is not clear how the function of artefacts could have related to entire exchange systems since artefacts may have been produced to be exchanged because of their 'exotic' quality in different settings (e.g., Spondylus was valued differently in central Europe). Thirdly, Perls' three distinct exchange networks appear to be generalisations over a large geographical area and during an extended period of time. Clearly, the evidence does not reflect directly a single or simple system of exchange for all kinds of artefacts (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 385) but even more so it does not appear to reflect only the three systems of exchange accounted by scholars so far.
Overall, there seems to be reasonable absence of good evidence for the parameters 'volume of output' and 'production centres'. This not only hints the inappropriateness of such 'capitalist' terminology, but would seem to highlight the fact that craft specialisation and exchange were embedded in the wider nexus of Neolithic village life and were not separate, uniquely important economical or technical practices. Here, one could agree with Perls (2001: 300) who emphasises that seasonal craft specialisation and exchange were driven by cultural choice rather than economic self-sufficiency and were instrumental in sustaining social relations (reciprocity, interdependency, kinship and family ties etc.). In addition, however, one could also envisage less rigidly demarcated production activities as the following example demonstrates. Although Souvatzi (2000: 108-110, 121) argues that area X8 at Dimini shows features of functional differentiation (concentration of incised pottery, tools and shell debris), she interprets this area as a multi-functional and flexible space (for making pottery, tools and shell ornaments) rather than a workshop for one type of artefact.
Furthermore, it has been argued that craft specialisation and exchange were not cumulative or teleological processes and therefore these may not be placed within the context of social evolution progressing towards complexity. While the increased visibility of prestige items in the LN and FN and the possibility of attached specialists (i.e., craftspeople producing exclusively for an outsider authority) could relate to the appearance of some kind of hierarchies (Kotsakis, 1996: 169; Perls, 1992: 135), these fact do not constitute evidence of a causal link between specialised production and exchange and social differentiation. In other words, the LN and FN hierarchies, if there were any at all, may have been the result of wider social and cultural currents to which craft specialisation and exchange adhered and had to adapt.
For most of the Neolithic, one would be inclined to agree largely with Perls (2001: 299-300) who, in the absence of any evidence for hierarchies, stresses the salience of seasonal and horizontal differentiation of social and economic roles. This not only signifies that the production of lithics, pottery and prestige items were part-time activities, but could also imply that there was a wider range of specialist roles (e.g., farmers, pastoralists, fishermen, priests). Moreover, the fact that these "heterarchical" and complementary roles (Nikolaidou, 2003b: 500) were organised and sustained in the Neolithic, lies at the centre of the complex social dynamics of Neolithic communities. Similarly, Souvatzi (2000: 164-165, 221), with reference to LN Dimini, emphasises that the complex social relations pertaining to the production and circulation of various artefacts do not constitute evidence for social inequality but could inform of social integration and cohesion.
Under this light, if craft specialisation and exchange played an important role in holding the Neolithic societies together, then the observed stability and longevity of the Neolithic village (Demoule and Perls, 1993: 363) may in itself serve as the strongest class of evidence for craft specialisation and exchange. Then, there would be no need to follow Perls' model of itinerant knappers as specialist suppliers or Vitelli's suggestion of potters-shamans as specialist producers in order to strengthen the case for exchange and craft specialisation respectively. Thus, the existing evidence in the archaeological record, including even the various ambiguities associated with it, such as the questionable visibility of lithics production centres, when appreciated more holistically in the context of a 'successful' mode of Neolithic village life, constitutes, in my opinion at least, sufficiently good evidence for considerable specialisation in the production and exchange of artefacts in the Neolithic Aegean.