Although the spread of agriculture is an overworked topic, the two authors of this article succeed in suggesting a good piece of information. As stated clearly in the first sentence, the authors' objective is to modify the Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza wave-of-advance model for the spread of farming into Europe. On the basis of the authors' ten year geo-archaeological investigation of the Thessalian plain in Greece and by reference to archaeological and historic data in Greece and elsewhere, the authors argue that the incoming settlers had a specific preference for large floodplain environments. This is an interesting thesis and coupled with the authors' scientific approach, extensive literature review, forceful style of writing and the fact that the article is published in one of the most prestigious archaeology journals, the reader is at first instance convinced. It is on closer inspection though that alongside the merits of the article a number of criticisms can be raised.
In the opening section the authors succinctly describe demic diffusion and the patchiness of Greek Neolithic sites and avoid a wider consideration of theories on the spread of agriculture possibly because this would have made the scope of the article too broad. The following section on flooding, levee-formation and avulsion does indeed appear to be necessary so that subsequent 'technical' sections on Thessaly can be understood. It comes, however, a little late in the article (p. 487) that the authors explicitly state what they have tried to do; namely to relate Neolithic sites to the landscape activity of the Peneios river.
The authors' key finding is that several early Neolithic mounds were located close to the floodplain and especially near alluvium deposits of silty clays and fine sands. The argument is logically developed a step further and by means of a stratigraphic analysis of two sites (Plateia Magoula Zarkou and Koutsaki Magoula) the authors show that Neolithic occupation and floodplain deposition were contemporaneous (p. 490). The next step in the argumentation can, however, be challenged as it does not necessarily relate to the previous argument. The authors emphasise the enhanced harvest reliability when farming on loam soils and taking advantage of flooding. The underlying assumption that the early farmers were preoccupied with maximising 'returns on investment' can be questioned.
It is further argued on page 494 that Thessaly is unique within Greece because: a) it allows for an efficient use of space by large populations; and b) the Peneios river deposits a very fertile loam. One notices that the first point is speculative supported by reference to one study of the delta of Niger, whereas the second point is less doubtful given the authors' morphological consideration of the Peneios river route. It is a shortcoming overall that the authors frequently mix 'scientific' or specific arguments with comparative information or generalisations. One can also discern some inconsistency in the argumentation. Although on p. 483 the authors argue against an extrapolation of current Mediterranean farming practices back to the Neolithic, the authors do relate historic data about cultivation on fluctuating Greek lakes to the Neolithic (p. 492-493).
The final 'Discussion' section of the article returns to the wave-of-advance model and the authors argue that migration from Anatolia was not driven by steady population growth. Instead, "migration occurred [in] discrete steps" (Note: [in] is missing presumably due to a typographic error, p. 497). After population grew in Thessaly there was a migratory move and settling in similar floodplains in southern Yugoslavia and Bulgaria (p. 497-498). The authors believe to have identified a pattern whereby the limited availability of large floodplains determined Neolithic sites. But is it about cultivation or occupation patterns? It is implied that the two are synonymous and that agriculture fully shaped the Neolithic everywhere.
At the end, the authors pose some interesting, but difficult to ascertain, questions about how the Thessalian plain came to be located by the first settlers. The closing remarks stress the need for further research on the chronology and environments of Neolithic settlements so as to achieve a better calculation of population and resource exploitation patterns (p. 498). If the answer to these economic questions were to complete our understanding of the introduction of farming, then this would not considerably challenge the essence of the wave-of-advance model and the relation between Neolithic settlements and floodplains could just feature as a small detail. This may actually be the key problem with this article. On the one hand, the authors succeed in showing a link between Neolithic sites and specific environments (although the number of sites examined by a soil auger is small and the authors must be given credit for admitting a small database p. 490). On the other hand, it is not absolutely certain that this link relates to the spread of farming. Large floodplains may indicate places where habitation persisted over a number of years but may not explain why people moved there in the first place. It seems too deterministic that specific environments prescribed where people should go.
As seen from the bibliography, the authors have previously published on Greek prehistory and Thessaly in particular and this fact gives weight to this article. That the principal writer is Dutch may denote a slight fascination with the importance of water and flooding. It appears though that the authors have a strong economic bias and leave out cultural aspects of landscape use that they could have illustrated by ethnographic examples.
There are also some unsubstantiated arguments in passing. There is no reason to assume that the rising mounds of abandoned levees add security to dwelling sites (p. 484). And why would not Neolithic people themselves undertake the construction of a mound if desired? Besides, the authors' tendency to draw analogies with different places across different times creates overtones of generalisations on human behaviour. So as to strengthen their argument that abandoned channels are favoured for habitation, reference is made to the Rhine valley in historic times as well as to prehistoric evidence from Mesopotamia, Hungary and the Mekong delta (p. 484-485). But is all this material relevant to the Early Neolithic? Can the authors claim originality in their findings or are they (re)-discovering existing arguments? The reliability of rather old sources (academic literature from the 1950s but also accounts from 1835, 1901 and 1932) can also be contested.
A rather knowledgeable readership is assumed and the non-specialist needs to read the article a few times so as to follow the main thesis through a wealth of information. The frequent use of technical descriptions (e.g., "...a ridge of Pliocene marl", p. 485), terms (e.g., "The Nessonis", table 2, p. 488) or names (Lake Ioannina, p. 493) make clarity difficult for those not familiar with geological processes or the geography of Greece. Key arguments are often 'interrupted' by data and fail to be taken up again at an interim conclusion stage. On page 485 the authors state that they aim to argue against dry-land farming. The first argument to support this is the pollen record that shows the absence of woodland clearance. Then, although the reader expects a second argument, there is a long technical narration about alluvium phases at the end of which the point is made that Neolithic sites were located near a then active floodplain (p. 487). It is not summarised that this fact argues against dry-land farming.
Almost every page has a map, diagram or table and the reader feels this is excessive. Figures 9 and 10 appear to be of little use and are only referenced many pages later. Why is the distribution of Bronze Age sites (Figure 10) relevant to an article on the "earliest farmers"? Although there is a good explanation next to every illustration, which, however, does not always repeat what is in the main text, many of the illustrations are slightly problematic. It is vague that Figure 1, showing the distribution of Neolithic settlements in Greece, draws from "miscellaneous sources" and "is not complete" (p. 482). As the reader is faced with Figure 2 on the "Construction of Levee & Backswamp" without having previously read about avulsion, a gap in the text flow is created. Figure 5, which lacks a title, is difficult to follow since diagram A is under diagram B. The total number of Neolithic sites on table 3 is 21 whereas the text on page 487 totals them as 19. It emerges that the plethora of illustrations does not make the article more convincing. Rather, one forms the impression that the illustrations belonged to a longer text and have been made to fit this journal article.
Overall, what is missing from this article, which achieves an impressive synthesis of data and arguments, is a clear and robust conclusion. The absence of a 'Conclusions' section testifies to that. However, even ten years after publication, this article cannot be totally dismissed and the relation between Neolithic sites and large floodplains appears informative. It would be difficult to argue though that a one-sided emphasis on palaeo-environments could transform our understanding of the spread of farming.