Crucially, it is important not to make the error of assuming that the poor in Elizabethan and Stuart England were perceived as a homogenous social group; this would possibly lead to a careless conclusion that the nature of policies devised by Parliament and implemented by parish authorities were the same for all paupers. Rather, the type of policies, whether helpful or repressive, depended largely on the category of the poor the policy was directed at. Generally, two types of poor were seen to exist. The deserving poor consisted of those suffering from temporary or life cycle poverty, including the elderly who had worked hard but were no longer capable of being self-sufficient. Contrastingly, the undeserving poor were vagrants and beggars- those deemed idle and a threat to social order. Arguably, those "considered worthy of assistance" were recipients of policies that were dictated by a genuine compassion to relieve them of their hardship. Before government began to formally intervene in poor relief in the 1530s, wealthy locals already possessed a genuine interest in assisting the impotent of their community; clergymen used the leftover of the stock for church maintenance- this consisting of cash, land and animals- and parish fraternities actually gave support to the poor outside their boundaries. For example, the guild of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Boston, Lincolnshire, gave roughly 22 to outside poor from 1518-1519. When the government abolished monasteries in 1536 and 1539, consequently halting almsgiving and parish stocks, the compassion inherent in society to provide for the needy at a local level encouraged Parliament to push through legislation that aimed to "develop more sophisticated methods of assisting the legitimate poor", notably the introduction of semi-compulsory parish rates and the order that maltsters sell corn to the poor below market value. On the other hand, as policies helping the deserving intensified, the undeserving were ever more subject to suppressive and uncompassionate legislation: in 1531, the government introduced the licensing of beggars and the whipping of vagabonds and in 1547, a statute was passed that permitted Justices of Peace to brand the letter 'V' on a man's chest with a hot iron if they were found guilty of living idly. Interestingly, these measures seem excessive if they are driven solely by fear. Surely, just sending them back to their settlement would be sufficient. Arguably, polices towards this strand of the poor were governed more by a hatred of their idleness, society seeing them as "a centre of physical as well as moral pollution". Ultimately however, this essay will question the notion that the approach to the poor was entirely shaped by moral attitudes towards the two main categories. The Houses of Correction, for instance, were established "not only for people who deserved punishment, but also for people who were simply in need of relief". Indeed, if the deserving were always treated compassionately, why were orphans as young as nine sent to work? If there was always a fear or hatred of the undeserving, why was the employment of sturdy beggars encouraged? Fundamentally, early modern England perceived it as their duty to provide welfare and work for the poor, this notion of a paternalistic society deriving from the prevailing belief in the body politic. Nevertheless, the character of this relief was largely engineered by economics, as opposed to a fiery philanthropic spirit or fear of strange beggars. One hardly detects a burning passion to help the poor, for example, when London decided to cut pensions in the 1570s because of a lack of income from the parish rate.
The increase in the "Tudor armoury of social paternalism" could have been due to a growing compassion amongst society to relieve the poor, especially as it was recognised that conditions had progressively worsened, real wages 37% of their value at the end of the sixteenth century than what they had been at the start. It was observed that the principal factors for their desperate state were due to forces outside their own control: the agricultural revolution, which had led to fewer jobs on the market, an increase in population, which had led to an escalation in competition for jobs, and economic crises from bad harvests, which resulted in rising prices that became unaffordable. There was thus a mounting effort to assist the poor from a situation in which they were helpless. When the local church was restructured in the 1530s, original forms of charity were weakened, an average 26 shillings of relief per parish removed. Yet, following this, there was greater determination to help those who found themselves no longer in receipt of substantial relief: 201 more almshouses were built from 1530 to 1599, these specifically designed for "local old people who had worked hard while they could but then fell into poverty", and the volume of gifts and bequests grew enormously in the 1550s compared to the past four decades. Further, this mounting effort of "supporting the deserving" is amplified by the fact that many villages brought back property formerly belonging to the dissolved monasteries and disabled parishes, utilising part of the income for poor relief. Seemingly, the Elizabethan government mirrored this compassion to help the poor as they faced escalating troubles; the parish rate, theoretically voluntary, was practically obligatory as a statute in 1563 gave Justices of Peace the power to back orders for payment with threat of imprisonment. Moreover, the turbulent 1590s provoked a new wave of policy "in favour of the poor": the Mayor of Bristol demanded that anyone with property should every day give one meal to a certain number of poor people and, in general, parish collections were increased. Clearly, these methods, specially empowering "local authorities to raise compulsory taxes for support of the poor", could have easily caused discontent amongst comfortable parishioners. Questionably, the government therefore were gaining nothing from these policies, only reassurance that the poor were recipients of greater welfare.
The government pressed for greater income, targeting privileges as a means of obtaining funds. In Ipswich, fines were levied on those who opened shops on Sundays. Also, in St. Albans, a man was ordered to pay money for obtaining a license to keep an alehouse before anyone else. Vitally though, redistribution of wealth was not the only method of assisting the poor; there is evidence showing there was an effort to control the market, provide food and fuel, and care for the sick. Critically, this reinforces the notion that the escalation in welfare was fashioned by a compassion to provide for those "in need of maintenance". Town rulers often brought corn for their inhabitants and in a sizeable amount of parishes, wood and coal were provided in winter. In order to help the needy, local authorities also requested that corn be sold at a lower rate than the market value. In 1623, a bushel of corn was being sold at 1 shilling below average in Warwick. Far from being fearful of the plague-carrying poor, policies were enacted which demonstrated great sympathy: watchmen were introduced to guard stricken houses, physicians were provided, and the rich who had fled from disease-stricken areas were ordered to pay double amount of the parish rate. Some towns such as Grantham and Worcester actually demanded that those who had fled return and help govern the town. Accordingly, these strategies illustrate "the paternal nature" of parish authorities and national government. Significantly, religious institutions also installed into society this mentality of wanting to perform good works for the less able. The Archbishops of York and Canterbury requested that people fast on Fridays and skip supper on Wednesdays to ensure sufficient food is left for the poor; there is evidence that these compassionate acts were definitely practiced in Wakefield and E.M.Leonard indicates that they probably occurred in other areas also. In essence, society appeared to have an inherent feeling of compassion towards the deserving poor, richer parishes often paying for the relief of the poor in parishes unable to cover the costs.
A statute in 1536 introduced local overseers of the poor who had a twofold function; firstly, to oversee the poor, and secondly, to correct idleness. This represents a clear differentiation in the attitude towards the deserving and undeserving. One can easily proceed to demonstrate that policies towards the elderly and children were primarily driven by compassion and the rules enforced on vagrants and beggars were immensely uncompassionate. Indeed, there was an ardent attempt to eliminate "unwanted outsiders" from the local community, the major 1598 and 1601 Elizabethan poor laws permitting authorities to get rid of incorrigible vagabonds by sending them overseas. One interpretation on this insensitive attack on the undeserving is that it was fuelled by a fear that "they were prone to violence and inappropriate social behaviour". The people of Norwich, for example, saw it as a massive problem to social stability when nearly two-thousand beggars roamed the streets. Thomas Starkey provides an insight into public perceptions about the state of parts of London dominated by the criminal poor, dreaming of Flemish and French cities, perhaps naively, that were free from disruption and "so godly, so well builded and so clean kept". Thus, there was an effort to suppress the undeserving in parishes as this would lessen anxiety about potential unrest. Hence, why London established a scheme where the local constable and churchwardens visited all the houses of the poor every fortnight to find any newcomers and send them away.
Nevertheless, simple fear of vagrants and beggars is not an ample explanation of why they were whipped before being told to flee. Indeed, many of the policies seemed to be stimulated by something more than just alarm of their supposed criminal capabilities. Possibly, society possessed a hatred of idleness- as seen by Chester Mayor John Webster banning breakfast on Christmas Day in 1557- and the undeserving were viewed as the archetypal idle person. Thus, policies were greatly influenced by a desire to clampdown on their immorality, brothels being shut down in Southwark in 1546 and begging being prohibited in Norwich. So strong was the outrage that those found giving to beggars were fined. The aggressive nature of the policies, every beggar receiving six stripes with a whip, show that they were probably fuelled by the animosity society felt towards the undeserving.
Fundamentally however, by claiming that the category of the poor always determined the nature of the policy is a hugely simplistic way of explaining poor relief in the early modern period. Certainly, the deserving were not treated with compassion all the time; Fitz Geffrie complains "O miserable condition! the poore man is put to a double labour, first to get a little money for corn and then to get a little corne for money". Placed alongside criminals in a House of Correction in Bury, those who suffered from life-cycle poverty had to endure rising at 4am and working till 7pm, resting only for morning and evening prayer. Additionally, compassion towards the poor altered from parish to parish. Parliament "lagged behind the more innovative local communities", yet in some places relief of the deserving was unimportant. Equally, not all beggars were ostracised from society; citizens were encouraged to employ those who were skilled. Evidently, there is an alternative driving force of welfare policy to social perceptions. A credible assessment is that policies were largely a result of fear of the threat to social order posed by both categories of poor. Disorder, it was assumed, derived from the discontent of the poor; as poverty worsened therefore, the response to it increased, so that anger would be curtailed. This motive of creating a time where "the peaceable citizen and peasant could work and live in security and quietness" is amplified by the reaction towards the numerous insurrections fighting against "the sufferings of the poor and the high prices of corn". It is no coincidence that the 1598 Elizabethan Poor Law followed the uprising of the Oxfordshire rebels in the 1590s. Consequently, this critique would account for the varying approaches to the undeserving and deserving regionally; parishes that were worse-off provoked more supportive policies.
Significantly, if the longing "to make England a peaceful community" was the only ingredient of the policies that emerged, this would imply that the only emotion society felt towards the deserving poor was fear. This is disproved by the fact that private donations still formed the largest proportion of poor relief in the 1560s. Unquestionably, the needy were treated differently to the undeserving. Part of this was due to social attitudes, but the chief reason was economics: "The local reaction...seems to have stemmed more from economic concerns". This is illustrated by the fact that, although citizens felt it their duty to look after those stricken by life-cycle or temporary poverty, finances always determined the nature of the policies enacted. Orphans and widows had to be helped, but this help was far from compassionate; authorities realised the practicality of placing illegitimate children with husbandless women so that "payments to that household filled a double function". Society had a duty towards those who were not economically independent, but that duty was to be kept to minimal costs. Moreover, it is likely that the harsh policies directed towards the undeserving were less due to fear or hatred. Rather, their presence was a drain on parish resources; sending vagabonds away was a way of ensuring they would not stay for three years and thus be entitled to the parish relief. Indeed, people thought it was a "good investment" to pay constables to get rid of the poor so future taxation was lessened; in Long Melford, Suffolk, parishioners gave forty shillings so approximately two-hundred and fifty poor people could be carried out in 1597.
Essentially, it is tempting to believe that how each category of poor was perceived was the significant factor in determining the nature of the policies. Yet, this analysis ignores the fact that "providing care or the means of employment for deserving poor people, using taxation as necessary, whilst at the same time dealing firmly, even repressively, with the idle or vagrant poor" was not consistently adhered to in early modern England. Those deemed deserving were not recipients of compassionate policies all the time; the daily inspection of houses in London, for example, shows that hardly any "respect was paid to individual freedom". Similarly, vagabonds and beggars were not treated with hostility in every parish, Marjorie McIntosh even claiming that "the level of anxiety diminished as local communities became accustomed to the presence of strangers and to new styles of behaviour". It could be that policy was dictated by fear or compassion depending on the parish, demonstrating that not one reason can be said to be more influential in shaping the escalation in relief for the poor in this period. Certainly, some areas increased relief as they felt the poor "threatened local order"; London sent alderman to report on how much people should get in relief to avoid them begging and resultantly becoming disgruntled. Yet, in some areas, genuine compassion shaped greater poor relief. Nevertheless, the increase in welfare due to fear or compassion seems to be restricted to a minority of parishes, where the threat of anarchy was perceived as alarming or the conditions of the poor ridiculously appalling. Mostly, policies were shaped by economics. Knowing they had a responsibility to look after the deserving, parishioners were hardly compassionate, preferring to place them in Houses of Correction with criminals or provide work instead of offering generous relief. Likewise, the undeserving were on the whole not seen as a considerable threat to the foundations of social harmony in parishes; the attempt to get rid of them was merely due to the fact that they could be an extra burden on village finances. In the 1570s, Norwich highlighted sending beggars away had saved 2818, indicating that saving money was the prime driving wheel behind welfare policy.