The Hellenistic period spans the time between Alexander's death in 323 BC and the sea-battle of Actium in 30 BC. The nineteenth century scholar Johann-Gustav Droysen, who coined the term Hellenistic Age, understood it as a cultural phenomenon associated with the spreading of Hellenism (Erskine, 2003: 1, 3). The founding of new cities in the East by Alexander and his successors has reinforced this notion of Hellenisation and diffusion of Greek 'civilisation' (Owens, 1991: 74; Gates, 2003: 277). In this light, Athens, as a centre of 'Old Greece' famous for its classical legacy, poses a number of challenges to the archaeologists who wish to understand it as a Hellenistic city.
The objective of this essay is to discuss the problems pertaining to archaeological investigations of Hellenistic Athens. Such problems include gaps in our factual knowledge due to the nature of evidence and the scholarly approaches underlying interpretations. An all-encompassing definition of the city includes an emphasis on its urban environment, institutions and civic traditions, resident elites and rulers, specific cultural features and networks of socio-economic relations. It will be assumed that all these aspects are relevant to an investigation of Hellenistic Athens but the primary focus of this essay will be the urban landscape. Thus, a 'reconstruction' of the Hellenistic city comprises initially a discussion of the building activity during that period. Consequently, an understanding of the physical landscape becomes a 'window' for looking into the internal dynamics and overall image of the city.
The urban focus of classical archaeology has been predominantly on fine architecture, dedications and statues at the expense of non-public space (Alcock, 1989: 141). The Agora excavations, in fact, dominate the evidence about Hellenistic Athens despite ambiguities emanating from the multiple superimposed excavation levels and the ruinous state of many surviving buildings. The positivist approach by traditional archaeologists has often resulted in narratives aiming at locating buildings and reconstructing their ground plans or superstructures according to the eighteenth-century drawings of Athens by Stuart and Revett or references made by ancient authors (e.g., Travlos, 1980; Travlos, 1993).
However, Green (1990: 399) is right to warn about the misleading nature of the sources for the Hellenistic period. The bias of many intellectuals, philosophers and poets, who generally criticised the Zeitgeist of the Hellenistic age, intimately relates to their definition of the city as a free sovereign state and the view that any loss of political autonomy would bring the end of the polis (Giovannini, 1993: 268). Therefore, Plutarch idolised the free classical polis but despised the Hellenistic monarchs (Green, 1990: 137) and Roman writers of imperial times are clearly imbued with nostalgia for the high classical period (Alcock, 2003: 39). Besides, Strabo and Pausanias provide only schematic accounts failing to inform about civic vitality (Alcock, 1989: 141). Habicht (1997: v) emphasises that the surviving sources specifically about Hellenistic Athens are often inadequate and fragmentary. For instance, there is a genuine shortage of information about the period from the Chremonidean war to 229 BC (Habicht, 1997: 157).
Given these limitations, this essay will critically assess the predominant reconstructions of Hellenistic Athens. In so doing, it will also address whether the major problems implicated arise from the archaeological record or the bias of scholarly explorations and interpretations.
According to the stereotypical view, the Hellenistic period saw the end of the classical city-states, bringing the corrosion of civic traditions, the shift to commercialist and cosmopolitan cities and the formation of larger political forms such as monarchies, federal leagues or imperial dominions (Gruen, 1993: 339; Green, 1990: 155). Within this 'new order', Athens, which had suffered defeat in Chaironea in 338 BC, was no longer free to take decisions but subject to foreign kings (Jones, 1940: 167; Moss, 1973: 127, 128). Athens was unable to regain its freedom from Macedon and was caught up in the conflicts between Alexander's successors (Moss, 1973: 102; Camp, 2001: 161). Hellenistic building activity in Athens reflects this backwater status (Tomlinson, 1992: 63) with the city represented as a helpless establishment affected by the greater scheme of events.
Despite these wider changes in the Hellenistic era, the end of the polis can be contested. Although cities were subordinate to mighty powers, city life and city institutions continued to be important and this can be supported by abundant epigraphic evidence (Erskine, 2003: 10; Billows, 2003: 210; Chamoux, 2003: 166). In addition, the emergence of novel architectural forms (e.g., the vault, the arch), and the renewed impetus to build coupled with the physical growth of many Hellenistic cities are significant indicators challenging any notions of decline (Chamoux, 2003: 282; Billows, 2003: 196).
Hellenistic cities were interconnected and followed an ideal of what a city ought to be in terms of physical landscape more than ever before (Giovannini, 1993: 284; Billows, 2003: 213). Cities were still able to manage their own affairs, stay active in diplomacy and inter-city arbitration (Gruen, 1993: 344) and engage in strategies that would counter decline such as sympoliteia, isopoliteia and koinon (Mackil, 2004: 512). In these respects, the theme of decline can be seen as a subjective interpretation rather than a generalisation supported by the archaeological evidence. Nevett (1993: 142-143) rightly stresses that arguments about the end of the polis reflect value judgements about the merits of society at certain points in time and implicate broader ideas about social evolution, democracy, the clash between rich and poor and Finley's economic models.
It is questionable whether this revised understanding of the Hellenistic city can be applied to Athens due to an underlying consensus that Athens is different from other Hellenistic cities. Firstly, there is a geographical shift from Classical to Hellenistic times to the mountainous North and West of Greece with cities emerging in Macedonia, Epiros and Aetolia (Bintliff, 1997: 1). Secondly, Hellenistic cities par excellence are located outside 'Old Greece'. In particular, Pergamon is repeatedly cited as the pinnacle of Hellenistic urban design and monumental architecture (Owens, 1991: 88). Clearly, Athens could not have been remodelled in the Hippodamian grid plan because it was heavily built before the Hellenistic period. The recent excavations at the Acropolis metro station have exposed a wide roadway which may have provided a better alignment and organisation of nearby houses and workshops in the Hellenistic period (Parlama and Stampolidis, 2000: 33-34) but overall there is little evidence for regular planning in Athens. However, comparisons between Athens and the rest of the Hellenistic world become problematic in themselves by hindering an understanding of internal Athenian dynamics while reinforcing, without sufficient reason, the image of Athens as a Hellenistic backwater.
It is reasonable to assume that the complex politico-military upheavals in the Hellenistic period affected the progress of public building. According to Thompson (1981: 350), the late fourth-century ruins of a large square structure excavated beneath the Stoa of Attalos in the Agora indicate that construction was abandoned due to the clash between Cassander and Demetrios Poliorketes. However, the tendency to associate specific historical events with excavated features could be misleading since the socio-political framework does not always affect the urban environment in ways that are easily understood.
Travlos (1993: 75-76, 78; 1980: 158-159) has argued that the fortifications of Athens were strengthened in the late fourth century, due to an imminent Macedonian assault, with the construction of the Proteixisma and moats (Figure 1, Plate I). It is likely, however, that in this case Travlos generalises from evidence for a moat found in a single excavation, while the emphasis he puts on the military constructions of Hellenistic Athens is heavily influenced by the accounts of war given by numerous ancient writers. One would be more inclined, perhaps, to agree with Wycherley (1978: 20-21), who draws his evidence from Hellenistic inscriptions. These inform about occasional maintenance work on the Athenian walls with the Diateichisma, which crossed the Pnyx area (Figure 2, Plate I), serving as the main fortification of the city because Athens did not have the financial means to undertake extensive wall construction. The White Poros Wall, which succeeded the Diateichisma (Gilman Romano, 1985: 452), was skilfully but economically built from stone that was easily cut (Conwell, 1996: 101). Although the White Poros Wall is thought to date from the late third century the down dating of associated pottery may actually bring its original date to about 175-150 BC (Conwell, 1996: 97). This may provide some evidence that even at later periods Athens was not particularly prosperous.
The troubled historical events between Athens and Macedon during the third century are thought to be responsible for the lack of new public buildings. For this reason, the large rectangular Arsenal to the northeast of the Hephaisteion stands out as an oddity (Camp, 1986: 166; Pounder, 1983: 245). It remains unclear why this building was constructed during a time of uncertainty and tight finances, 270-260 BC (Pounder, 1983: 244, 246), and the identification as an arsenal is not without its limitations. Any understanding of this structure has been based largely on its foundation trenches and similarities between its ground plan and another arsenal in Peiraieus (Pounder, 1983: 233, 238).
Building activity clearly resumed in the second century and this has been attributed to external stimuli because various foreign kings competed to adorn Athens with elaborate architecture (Camp, 2001: 170; Camp, 1986: 169; Green, 1990: 52). In the Agora (Figure 3, Plate II) the construction of long porticos (Stoa of Attalos, Middle Stoa and South Stoa II) has been interpreted as an attempt to order the haphazard layout whilst making Athens resemble the Hellenistic plan of cities in Asia Minor (Camp, 2001: 182; Camp, 1986: 180; Travlos, 1993: 86; Tomlinson, 1992: 64; Chamoux, 2003: 272). Therefore, it is implied that foreign benefactors assisted Athens in finding its rightful place in the Hellenistic world by transplanting elements of the Hellenistic koine such as colonnades and monumental architecture.
However, the vast new porticos were self-contained units and did not resemble a typical Hellenistic marketplace with Ionian colonnades (Wycherley, 1978: 80). Although the Middle Stoa divided the square of the Agora into two unequal sections (Camp, 2001: 180; Camp, 1986: 175) a great deal of open space still remained (Wycherley, 1978: 82). Moreover, as Shear (1981: 360) points out, the Agora porticos respected the ancient tradition of the open square. The Middle Stoa and the Stoa of Attalos were placed at right angles with their approaches pointing to where the Panathenaic Way crossed the square. These appear to provide evidence against the complete revamping of the Agora according to external Hellenistic prototypes. This can be substantiated further by comparing the Hellenistic Agora to that of the second century AD (Figure 4, Plate II) when the excessive infilling of the Agora entailed the relocation of entire classical temples from rural Attica (Alcock, 1993: 192-193; Alcock, 2003: 56-57). Therefore, direct references to the classical past and a complete change of the Agora become more evident in the second century AD rather than BC.
In addition, it is difficult to evaluate the new urban environment of the Hellenistic Agora because the functions of many of the new buildings remain unclear. The Metroon was probably used as a sanctuary and archive although its interior arrangement is not that well understood (Camp, 2001: 182; Camp, 1986: 179). The purpose of the South Square is also unknown with a commercial function presumed (Wycherley, 1978: 80; Camp, 2001: 182; Camp, 1986: 177). Furthermore, it is problematic to assume that all these new buildings were expensive. For example, various local materials were used for the Stoa of Attalos: Pentelic and Hymettian marble, limestone and conglomerate foundations (Travlos, 1980: 505). In this light, it becomes more difficult to agree with Chamoux (2003: 271) that the Stoa of Attalos was grandiose and commanded the surroundings, because such claims are probably influenced by the present day reconstruction of this building. The restoration of the Stoa of Attalos according to Travlos' drawings (Travlos, 1980: 506) could be bearing the bias of ancient sources since Travlos appears to adhere very strictly to textual evidence (Figure 5, Plate III).
Ptolemy III built a Gymnasium and this is thought to reflect the thriving academic and philosophical life of Athens and the appreciation of the city as a cultural centre by Hellenistic kings (Wycherley, 1978: 233; Travlos, 1993: 90; Chamoux, 2003: 247). However, it remains unclear where exactly the Gymnasium of Ptolemy was located. Travlos (1980: 236) appears to favour its presence within the Agora where the Middle Stoa and Southern Stoa II were situated (Figure 6, Plate III). The capitals and cornice of the monumental portico constructed on the southern slope of the Acropolis by Eumenes II were made from Pergamene marble suggesting that these were carved in Pergamon and shipped to Athens (Camp, 2001: 170-171). Clearly, Pergamon was also appreciated as a major cultural metropolis at the time and projected an image as the cultural heir to Athens (Gates, 2003: 281, 287). Overall, the Stoa of Eumenes is still not that well understood because it was destroyed during the Herulian invasion of AD 267. The displaced fragment from its cornice, which was recovered in the recent railway excavations at the Acropolis metro station, confirms the extensive destruction (Parlama and Stampolidis, 2000: 53).
In 174 BC Antiochus IV Epiphanes resumed construction on the temple of Olympian Zeus (Figures 7 & 8, Plate IV). The gigantic size of this temple has been interpreted as a sign of Hellenistic ostentation and emulation of the colossal temples of Samos, Ephesos and Didyma (Green, 1990: 526-527; Camp, 2001: 174). The exceptional measurements of this temple reflect Antiochus' megalomania, rather than his generosity, since the temple could not be completed in his lifetime but was finished by Hadrian in the second century AD. Therefore, it is difficult to consider this monument as exemplary of Hellenistic Athens or as a symbol of the decline of Athens into authoritarianism since more than one rulers were associated with its construction.
The freestanding sculptural group of the Attalid dedication on the Acropolis reveals, quite possibly, a different aspect of foreign donations to second-century Athens. Stewart (2004: 226) has interpreted the Attalid dedication as a gesture of sympatheia towards the suffering Athenians. The battle groups make an allegory to Athens' contemporary troubles and the depicted Giants, Persians and Gauls symbolise Macedonian barbarism (Stewart, 2004: 223-224). Therefore, this architectural gift would have appealed to the city's collective memory without signalling the transplantation of foreign spatio-temporal features in the Athenian landscape. The exact dating of these sculptures is disputed and Stewart favours 200 BC due to a closer fit with contemporary historical events (Stewart, 2004: 218-219, 223). Furthermore, Stewart's interpretations rest on the assumption that the surviving Roman sculptures are indeed copies of the Hellenistic originals (Kosmetatou, 2006: 182). These discrepancies, however, could make the argument that the sculptures implicitly refer to specific historical events a more precarious one.
The Horologion of Andronikos (Figures 9 & 10, Plate V) is an example of a well-preserved octagonal tower whose dating and function are debatable. Camp (2001: 179) dates the structure to the middle of the second century based on the style of the sculptured relief panels of the eight Winds. However, these sculptures are severely damaged and there are claims that the Horologion dates from the first century (Robinson, 1984: 424; Rottlnder et al, 1989: 61). The overall range of functions, which include sundial, water clock and showing the wind direction, remain unresolved and become even more obscure by arguments that the building related to astronomy and the Neo-Pythagoreans (Rottlnder  et al, 1989: 56, 61). There is no reason, however, to elevate the importance of the Horologion by claiming that it exemplifies the first occurrence of octagonal architecture as argued by Rottlnder et al (1989: 58-59). It is also highly unlikely that the location of the Horologion to the east of the later Roman marketplace (Travlos, 1980: 281) made it a very important civic building in Hellenistic Athens.
The new Roman marketplace was funded by Julius Caesar, who visited Athens in 47 BC. This new Agora had no Athenian architectural parallel and with its peristyle court clearly resembled imperial fora (Shear, 1981: 358-359; Wycherley, 1978: 102). Various Roman benefactors financed the construction of educational institutions (odeia, libraries, gymnasia) in fist-century Athens (Camp, 2001: 184). Therefore, the Athenian landscape changed dramatically in late Hellenistic times. Moreover, it is widely argued that Sulla's sack of Athens in 86 BC was a turning point for the urban environment of the city (Shear, 1981: 356, Green, 1990: 564; Travlos, 1993: 92, Mikalson, 1998: 314). Given the real change in building activity under Roman rule, it is possible that the 'Romanisation' of Athens has been projected back to the entire Hellenistic period strengthening the underlying theme of continuous post-classical decline.
The traditional historical account of Hellenistic Athens is imbued with negative sentiments and comparisons with the classical past. Moss (1973: 114, 119, 136, 144-145) despairs that at the end of the fourth century Athens was no longer an isonomic community of citizen-soldiers, by late third century any hegemonic aspirations were forever lost and during the second century rich "bourgeois" traders dominated Athens. This biased belief that Hellenistic Athens exemplifies the decline of a civilisation (Moss, 1973: 152) unjustly reduces the physical environment to a mere illustration of this decline. The Hellenistic built environment is compared with the ages of Pericles and Lykourgos and is regarded as indicative of the demise of civic traditions (Green, 1990: 94-95; Habicht, 1997: 24). There are a number of reasons why this assertion can be challenged.
Firstly, the actual lack of public funds, rather than lack of civic spirit, was a genuine limiting factor affecting Hellenistic building activity. Lykourgos, who was in charge of state finances from 338 to 326 BC, carried out an ambitious building programme, which included the remodelling of many sanctuaries, the renovation of the Theatre of Dionysus and modifications on the Pnyx hill (Mikalson, 1998: 29; Gilman Romano, 1985: 452). If the fourth-century building activity was comparable to that of classical Athens (Knell, 2000: 11-12), then this would clearly result in diminished public finances. Furthermore, the turbulent historical events affecting Hellenistic Athens realistically dried up funds and energy to engage in new extensive building programmes.
Secondly, from a comparison with the classical era it emerges that Hellenistic Athens was not strikingly different in terms of traditions but showed elements of intended continuity. The public buildings of Lykourgos were underpinned by antiquarianism. For example, the temple of Apollo Patroos, ancestor of all Athenians, emphasised the salience of traditions (Hendrick, 1988: 210). This does not necessarily reflect nostalgia for the classical past because in the Greek city success as an individual or as a state was always derived from honouring the ancestral gods in the ancestral ways (Mikalson, 1998: 289). Therefore, the model of ancestral traditions in the age of Lykourgos was preserved to the end of the Hellenistic period and this became a vehicle for preserving classical values and the idea of the city-state (Fergusson, 1911: 308; Mikalson, 1998: 307, 323).
It is possible to argue that religious and civic traditions were strongly intertwined in Hellenistic Athens. Despite the loss of political independence, institutionalised religious systems survived in the Greek cities as a wider Hellenistic phenomenon (Bruit Zaidman and Schmitt Pantel, 1992: 233). With social inequalities rising and wealthy elites increasingly controlling civic affairs, enhanced religiosity and ancestor cult in Hellenistic Greece were responses to restructuring the polis (Alcock, 1991: 457). These arguments apply particularly well to Hellenistic Athens since, in comparison to other cities, it remained insular and conservative especially before the acquisition of Delos in 167 BC (Mikalson, 1998: 312-313). Therefore, it is possible to understand the vitality in state religion in Hellenistic Athens as indicative of persistent civic traditions. For example, the cult of benefactors in Athens was associated with wider celebrations of Persian battles from the classical era (Potter, 2003: 417-418).
Thirdly, it is difficult to interpret euergetism and ruler cult in Hellenistic Athens as symptoms of the loss of civic spirit. Traditionally, Hellenistic patronage and honours to individual benefactors (euergetai) are characterised negatively because of comparisons to the classical system of litourgies (Gruen, 1993: 349). Besides, the proliferation of statues to public figures in late Hellenistic Athens (150-30 BC) is interpreted as the demise of the collective ideal embodied in the polis (Green, 1990: 567). However, the increasing dependence on wealthy individuals constituted a proactive strategy by the Athenians to secure funds for public expenditure and this could account for the large number of honorary decrees (Hakkarainen, 1997: 30-31). Many of these benefactors were zealous patriots and increasingly the mechanism of euergetism was combined with public services (Gruen, 1993: 349-350). For instance, an Athenian inscription of 281 BC praises Euthius for effectively carrying out his duties as magistrate rather than for any financial donations to the city (Gruen, 1993: 351). In addition, many Hellenistic decrees in Athens praise the family of certain individuals (Mikalson, 1998: 310-311). This shows that euergetism was embedded in wider traditions emphasising lineage and did not simply reflect the rise of new personal cults.
With reference to ruler cult, the various kinds of honours Athenians attributed to Demetrius Poliorketes, Antigonus Gonatas, Ptolemy III and Attalus I are traditionally regarded as signs of religious degeneration and political desperation (Erskine, 2000: 125; Green, 1990: 398-399). However, ruler cult was an instrument employed by the Athenians, rather than imposed by the ruler, aiming to establish close ties between city and ruler and secure his protection and favours. Thus, Athens willingly opted to play the role of the inferior vis--vis powerful (god-like) monarchs (Chaniotis, 2003: 439-440). Furthermore, ruler cult was historically contingent. The cults of Demetrius Poliorketes and Antigonus I in 307/6 BC were dismantled twenty years later (Mikalson, 1998: 295). The cult of Attalos I in 200 BC was established as part of the efforts made by the Athenians to side by Pergamon which was against Philip V of Macedon at that time (Habicht, 1990: 562). It is also difficult to study ruler cult from the archaeological record. For example, little is known about the bronze colossi of Eumenes and Attalos in the Acropolis Propylaia and who erected them (Eumenes, his successors or the Athenians). The statues are totally lost, it is unclear which Attalos (I, II and III) was represented and only a large base survives today with Pergamene workmanship (Stewart, 2004: 198, 223; Camp, 2001: 172; Travlos, 1993: 86).
Fourthly, epigraphic evidence from Hellenistic Athens supports the persistence of civic self-confidence. Compared to the fourth century there is a decline in the number of inscriptions in Hellenistic Athens, but compared to other cities Athens continues to have a large corpus of inscriptions. This continuity in the epigraphical habit possibly relates to continuity in the ideology of democracy (Hendrick, 1999: 404). In addition, many of the honours attributed to individuals are explicitly political. For example, Diogenes was convinced to remove the Macedonian garrison in 229 BC and was subsequently given divine honours for restoring freedom and democracy (Mikalosn, 1998: 308). Therefore, the existence of external 'masters' and the presence of wealthy elites within Athens were not contrary to classical civic traditions, the political activity of Athenian citizens or the very viability of the city as a political body (Hendrick, 1999: 404; Habicht, 1997: 366).
Hellenistic Athens is often presented in the literature as a foreigners' puppet or as cultural Mecca (Stewart, 2004: 233). The applicability of both of these models can be questioned especially since these characterisations have negative connotations and hinder an objective consideration of internal city dynamics.
Regarding the view of Athens as a foreigners' puppet, the various building gifts to Athens may be more informative about the donors than the alleged decline of the city. The Stoa of Attalos was fitted with a dedication inscription (Camp, 1986: 172) and this suggests that Philhellene kings engaged in self-advertisement (Tomlinson, 1992: 63). Although Athens became a 'stage' for foreign benefactors, this did not mean the end of the Athenian 'state'. In agreeing with Alcock (1989: 141) that monumentality often reflects the wealth of a certain elite rather than the general standard of prosperity in the city, it ought to be highlighted that the foreign building donations to Athens did not entail the exploitation of the local Athenian population. In these respects, the splendid new buildings by the Ptolemies, Attalids and Romans may not be quite as indicative of contemporary Athenian city life.
Furthermore, these cultural gifts were embedded in complex and historically contingent bilateral relations. The special relationship between Athens and the Ptolemies was sustained even in the second century when Egypt, after dismantling its bases in the Aegean, was no longer in a position to offer Athens protection against Macedonian domination (Habicht, 1997: 220-222; Habicht, 1992: 77-78). The Pergamene monarchs were important political allies to Athens, especially in the second century (Habicht, 1990: 563). The Athenians were proactively shaping their foreign policies according to changing circumstances and at the same time, foreign monarchs had vested interests to assist Athens. Therefore, it cannot be inferred solely from building gifts that Hellenistic Athens was reduced to a foreigners' pawn.
With reference to the understanding of Athens as cultural Mecca, it has been emphasised excessively that the cultural and educational role of the city was a substitute for its politico-economic weakness (Camp, 2001: 170; Green, 1990: 565). It has also been argued that Athenian art, philosophy and literature and the glorious classical legacy were important to the survival of the city's aura and its appeal to outsiders (Green, 1990: 565; Moss, 1973: 102). Such views appear to abstract the image of the city and equate Athens with a metaphor for 'culture'. However, it is unclear whether the model of cultural Mecca addresses the actual nature of Hellenistic building activity. The accounts of Ferguson (1911: 307) and Jones (1940: 263) emphasise that the reputation of Athens as centre of learning and its distinctiveness compared to other cultural metropoleis such as Alexandria, Antioch and Pergamon, attracted foreign patronage that was vital to the survival of the city. Therefore, the notion of cultural Mecca attempts to deal with the paradox that Athens survived and prospered in the absence of civic self-confidence or military and political power. Such interpretative approaches conceal an underlying preoccupation with explaining the continued, yet problematic, importance of Athens in post-classical times.
Although Athens was clearly valued for its cultural heritage and served as an educational centre in the Hellenistic world, one easily finds the cultural Mecca model being overstated despite its lack of explanatory power. Furthermore, the Roman attitude towards Athens was underpinned by pilgrimage and tourism as it was fashionable for Roman nobles to receive education in Athens (Shear, 1981: 357; Green, 1990: 526). It is likely, however, that this Roman admiration for Athens (Camp, 2001: 183-184) has been unjustly applied to the entire Hellenistic period, making the cultural Mecca model a gross generalisation. The fills of the Hellenistic porticos in the Agora (Stoa of Attalos, Middle Stoa and South Stoa II) have yielded many large clay moulds and industrial debris (Grandjouan et al, 1989: 1). These provide evidence for late fourth-century craftsmanship and diverse commercial activity involving distant trade links with other Hellenistic cities (Grandjouan et al, 1989: 44). By this account, it would appear that there were many areas of vitality and dynamism in Hellenistic Athens, something which could potentially take the emphasis away from the cultural image of the city.
As exemplified in the preceding discussion, the precise dating and function of many Hellenistic structures are subject to debate. However, most problems pertaining to the reconstruction of Hellenistic Athens are the result of biased approaches and interpretations rather than the nature of the evidence. It appears to be problematic to place Athens in the wider Hellenistic world since comparisons with major Hellenistic centres reinforce that Athens is not a Hellenistic but a classical city par excellence. Therefore, arguments against the decline of the polis in the Hellenistic period can be applied to Athens only to a limited extent.
The complicated politico-military events affecting Hellenistic Athens inevitably had a bearing on the built environment, as there is evidence for economising, abandoning or the ceasing of building activity and destructions. The relationship between specific historical events and the urban landscape is not always well understood given that ancient sources are biased or fragmentary. Thus, the tendency to make various architectural structures 'fit' certain historical contexts could involve circular arguments.
The prevailing reconstruction of irreversible decline in the civic traditions of Hellenistic Athens can be questioned. The intended continuity with classical religious traditions served as a vehicle for the persistence of civic spirit. Euergetism and ruler cult can be re-interpreted as proactive strategies for securing funds, favours and protection. Furthermore, continuity in the Athenian epigraphical habit reflects that Hellenistic Athens had not lost its civic self-confidence but still functioned as a political body.
Hellenistic Athens was far from a foreigners' puppet. The various building gifts by external benefactors show that Athens acted as a 'stage' for their self-advertisement. Consequently, there is no reason to equate colonnaded porticos with a 'Hellenisation' of Athens derived from abroad. Besides, these external donations were part of bilateral relations and historically contingent foreign policies followed by the Athenians. Although Hellenistic Athens was widely valued as an educational and cultural metropolis, the model of a cultural Mecca has been overstated. This is because it has tried to explain the paradoxical 'survival' of Athens despite the loss of political might.
The study of Hellenistic Athens is hindered, in part at least, by hardened orthodoxies imbued with negative bias. Despite this, the most important problem area seems to be the lack of archaeological rather than historical research in the dynamics of Hellenistic Athens per se. There is a need for scholarly accounts that move beyond geographical (horizontal) comparisons with thriving Hellenistic cities and chronological (vertical) comparisons with the classical era. Ancient authors, who have paid excessive tribute to the marvels of classical Athens, appear to have influenced academic scholarship discussing the Hellenistic city of Athens as an 'ideal' of what it ought to have been. Such themes impede an unbiased identification of Hellenistic Athens with its contemporary built environment. The fact that Athens during the Hellenistic period exemplifies little internally-driven public building programmes needs to be objectively addressed and accounted for. This limited building activity can also be regarded as a particularly intriguing, if not challenging at the very least, feature of a Hellenistic city which, as it has been argued in this essay, did not live in an idealised past but was actively engaged in the complex realities of the Hellenistic world.