The archaeology of the Bronze Age of the Greek mainland has traditionally entailed attempts to confirm the Homeric texts, stylistic comparisons of architecture, artistic appreciations of finds and detailed examinations of pottery in order to achieve chronological refinements. The notion of the 'state' in archaeology implicates evolutionary thinking and theories influenced by the social and biological sciences (Chapman, 2003). However, the term 'state' has advantages over the traditional approaches. It can prove to be a useful analytical tool for understanding the structure of mainland societies as it encompasses specific organisational attributes.
In order to address the first part of the question it is necessary to identify the point in time when states become visible archaeologically. Since complex chiefdoms exemplify social inequality and a hierarchical structure, these can be regarded as precursors to state societies (Flannery, 1999: 4). Therefore, one needs to ascertain when mainland societies had clearly passed the 'threshold' from chiefdom to statehood. Consequently, the early state can be defined as the first state to emerge following the chiefdom mode of organisation.
It ought to be emphasised that the definition of 'early state' within archaeology is a contested issue. Smith (2003: 17, 19, 87, 275, 277) rightly stresses that various political agendas, such as current nation states, traditional historicism and comparative politics, inevitably affect the archaeological study of early states. In this paper, I would like to follow a historical materialist perspective taking the state society to refer to a specific political structure (Chapman, 2003: 98; Smith, 2003: 85). Specifically, I would like to draw upon the presence of the following features as highlighted by Chapman (2003: 46-47, 96-97; 2005: 79-80) in order to investigate the emergence of early states: 1) success for the few at the top and protection of their privileges, 2) class, rather than kinship, as societal structuring principle, 3) physical or ideological coercion, 4) a decision-making hierarchy and 5) bureaucracy and centralisation of economic and political activities.
This essay will follow a factual approach and will assess critically the archaeological evidence for early state emergence and form. Any analysis of the process of state emergence and formation, in other words the gradual or abrupt rise of the state, is beyond the scope of this research. Furthermore, it will be assumed that the emergence of mainland state society was not secondary to Minoan states and for this reason any comparisons with Crete will be avoided.
Regarding the geographical specification of 'mainland Greece', given the nature of available evidence this essay will focus primarily on southern Greece. This is because the existence of an early state in Thessaly at the coastal area of modern Volos is questionable (Andreou et al, 2001: 272-273). In addition, any evidence that the Macedonian sites of Kastanas, Assiros and Toumba Thessalonikis, which show elements for large-scale agricultural storage, actually indicate complex social differentiation remains inconclusive (Andreou, 2001: 166, 169; Andreou et al, 2001: 304).
In order to address the second part of the question I will be examining the character and power base of mainland states. This is because state form clearly pertains to the nature of state organisation, such as the extent of centralisation. While it may seem problematic to generalise about state form across different sites (Galatay and Parkinson, 1999: 4), for brevity this essay cannot possibly examine the intricate differences in state form between centres such as Pylos, Mycenae, Tiryns and Thebes. Finally, the term 'palace' will be used loosely in this essay to denote major Mycenaean sites.
As detailed in the above commentary the EH archaeological record does not appear to approximate the scale and complexity of the five state-defining features. Evidence for architectural elaboration, large settlements and artefacts of unique artisanship during that phase most likely reflect petty chiefdoms. The Shaft Grave and massive fortifications of MH Kolonna do not substantiate claims to statehood because as Chapman (2005: 93) remarks centralised functions and class relations are questionable. The marking-out of social status in the exceptionally rich MHIII-LHI Shaft Graves at Mycenae does not equal class-consciousness because kinship ties remained structurally important. The absence of evidence for decision-making hierarchies and centralised politico-economic functions may in fact be a symptom of the precarious position of the Shaft Grave elites within a complex chiefdom society.
In contrast to earlier periods, all of the state features become visible in the archaeological record during LHIIIA-B when societies appear to have passed the threshold from chiefdom to statehood. However, this essay has not argued for lines of continuity or discontinuity throughout the Bronze Age as it is ambiguous whether and how these affected the appearance and form of mainland states. To a certain extent, the point in time when the early state emerged depends on the sophistication of the definition of the state and the concentration of archaeological research on certain Mycenaean citadels.
The Linear B tablets appear to have biased our understanding of state form creating a picture of highly centralised bureaucracies. Recent re-interpretations of the extent of centralisation have been based on disputable archaeological evidence for workshops, export industries and redistribution of agricultural surpluses in the 'palaces'. Furthermore, there have been arguments for broad 'non-palatial' agricultural activity and collaborative farming arrangements. It remains unclear exactly how 'palatial' and 'non-palatial' sectors interacted and whether this involved tensions, toleration or mutual interests. Additional cleavages in society may have intersected the 'palace'/'non-palace' divide.
The form of Mycenaean states was neither predominantly nor exclusively economic. It remains a speculation whether the act of management per se constituted an important source of power without connotations for ever-increasing complexity and oppression. The link between top elites and ritual engagements may relate to various strategies for legitimating the political order. If there was a military official ideology then this was probably integrated within the wider religious sphere. Given that the centrality of the "wanax" beyond the ritual domain is questioned, various elites may have been important in shaping the state form with their decisions. If the existence of heterarchical structures can be ascertained by future research, then surely this will challenge the prevailing image of a strictly hierarchical organisational form.
The emergent state form in mainland Greece was not dictated by systemic variables but was underpinned by issues and relations of power and authority as well as by strategies for legitimating the status quo. If various elites managed the state as a political form through decision-making, then the emergence of the early state and the form(s) it assumed were not accidental. Therefore, although it is possible to challenge the extent of centralised control and envisage diverse and interrelated power bases affecting state organisation, individual leaders may have been instrumental in defining both when the early state emerged and the kinds of form it took.