Anthocyanins are pigments present in a large number of plant tissues including flowers, and fruits which give them their red, violet, and blue colour (Macheix et al., 1990). They are widely distributed flavonoid found most abundant in fruits such as black currants (Slimestad & Solheim, 2002), grapes (Burns et al., 2002) and berries (Nyman & Kumpulainen, 2001). Although they are present in certain vegetables like aubergines, cabbage, red onions and red beans (Wu & Prior, 2005), little work has been done to investigate the anthocyanins in those foods. Also, it will be quite interesting if there are more researches on fruit juice and mixed fruits. Anthocyanins are considered of crucial nutritional importance in the prevention of chronic diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular disease and degradative diseases due to their antioxidant properties (Wu & Prior, 2005).
More than 600 naturally occurring anthocyanins and six major anthocyanidins have been reported (Williams & Grayer, 2004). Anthocyanin contents which mainly found in the skin are generally proportional to color intensity and increase as the fruit ripens (Burns et al., 2002). They are consumed by humans as part of a normal diet. Dietary intake has been estimated at up to 200 mg/day (Kuhnau, 1976).
Dietary antioxidants have attracted considerable interest due to their free radicals scavenging property (Prior et al., 1998). The physiological function of dietary antioxidants is suggested to protect living organisms from oxidative damage, resulting in the prevention of diseases (Wang et al,. 1999). Diets rich in fruits and vegetables are associated with a reduced risk for these pathologies, and protection has often been attributed to antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin C, vitamin E, and -carotene. However, other dietary components may also be important protective agents (Prior, 2003).
In some fruits, anthocyanins make a major contribution to the total antioxidant capacity. Among all common fruits and vegetables in the diet, berries, especially blueberries, have the highest antioxidant capacities (Prior et al., 1998). During the past two decades, a growing number of studies have investigated the diverse health benefits and protective effects of anthocyanins present in various fruits and vegetables. However, those studies just looked at the benefits of each kind of food. As different food have different contents of anthocyanins with different structures and thus offer different protective mechanisms to different levels. It will be very interesting and useful to investigate the health benefits of diet with mixed food. Anthocyanins are found to involve in a wide range of biological activities including antioxidant (Prior et al., 1998; Chaovanalikit et al., 2004), anti-inflammatory (Wang et al., 1999), anti-carcinogenic activities (Lazzeal. 2004), cardioprotective (Marniemi et al., 2000) and neuroprotective actions. The health effects of anthocyanins depend on the amount consumed and on their bioavailability (Ichiyanagi et al., 2004).
Aims will be addressed by the following objectives: