I have elected to analyse the sample using the sociological approach of Conversation Analysis (CA). Principally this is because the sample is a piece of unplanned discourse; there is no pre-structured conversation plan that the speakers are following. While CA does not solely apply to what we might term conversations, but also to, for example, spoken discourse in professional environments, political speeches or communication associated with the media (Cameron 2001), it is a particularly effective approach when analysing natural speech by ordinary people. As Heritage states, CA holds its roots with the ethnomethodologists, who were interested in the common sense knowledge of a community and so we look here at 'the study of common sense reasoning skills and abilities through which the ordinary members of a culture produce and recognise intelligible courses of action' (Heritage 1985: 1).
Above all therefore, CA examines what actually happens in speech and this in turn reveals the patterning and the structure underlying the data. Each utterance is examined in the context of the previous utterance and every detail can be relevant to the understanding of the discourse (Heritage 1985). I am thus still able to produce a detailed analysis, despite only concentrating on a small sample of data.
Consequently, in order to make a detailed analysis taking into account the structure and negotiations involved in natural everyday spoken discourse, CA primarily examines the turn taking mechanisms of conversation. That is to say the turn construction units, turn allocation and turn transitions. I will be examining these features of discourse in order to analyse the workings of everyday conversation (appendix 2). CA looks at the rules that underlie conversation and aims to answer questions such as, what stops us from talking all at once? How do conversations flow? (Cameron 2001). These basic goals of CA led me to choose this method as the focus for my analysis.
During my analysis, I raised a number of ambiguities. Firstly, it can be difficult to distinguish whether a contribution is a backchannel or a turn. An example of this is in line 22. This is a vague area in CA and the literature is not very helpful in providing a solution. Duncan and Niederehe (1974 in Coulthard 1985) highlight the ambiguity and conclude that intuition must be the deciding factor. Grice's cooperative approach might afford a better analysis because Grice assumed that in communication, speakers are cooperating. There would therefore be no need to distinguish between a backchannel or a turn as interest would lie in how speakers do not let communication breakdown. It is the meaning that is important, the '...speakers' abilities to convey more than the stable semantic core of their words' (Schiffrin 1990). The rules (or Maxims) that allow effective communication would be at the heart of the analysis (Thomas, 1995).
Similarly, I raised the difficulty of differentiating between backchannels to support and backchannels to indicate for the speaker to continue. Here the speaker's intentions could help and Austin's Speech Act theory could provide an approach to this problem. Austin's performative hypothesis defined 'words as actions' (Thomas 1995: 29), the idea being that we say things in order to do things. However, as Cameron points out, the same form does not always mean the same thing and the same meaning can take different linguistic forms (Cameron 2001). Similarly, the use of non-specific vocabulary such as, 'and do it extra do it outside school' (line 5) and, '...it's just' (line 15) can prove ambiguous. What does 'it' refer to? To interpret all of these utterances an awareness of the speaker's intention in that particular context is necessary (Underwood 1989). Again, intuition would have to decide the illocutionary force. However, the perlocutionary act can shed some light. If the other speaker continues, the backchannel has been interpreted as an invitation to continue, even if it is unclear if the speaker performing the backchannel was also showing agreement. The focus should not be on the illocutionary act in these instances because '...interaction proceeds according to the listener's interpretation of the force of the utterance' (Coulthard 1985: 20). The Sinclair and Coulthard linguistic approach might also give a different interpretation as 'discourse is interested in what the speaker is using an item for' (Sinclair and Coulthard 1992: 8). Utterances can be understood by taking into account the situation and the tactics, that is to say 'the way in which items precede, follow and are related to each other' (Sinclair and Coulthard 1992: 9). However, the IRF structure may have proved too rigid for the analysis of conversation, being more suited to a classroom context. In natural conversation, utterances are not always marked with a frame and followed by a focus of what will be addressed.
Finally, details of paralinguistic features such as gaze and gesticulation might have changed my interpretation and produced a more detailed analysis. For example, gaze influences turn allocation (Coulthard 1985) and having details about speaker gaze may have highlighted instances of other-select turn allocation. Gesticulation also gives extra details about when a speaker is reaching the end of a turn (Coulthard 1985), or on their agreement with a point. Similarly, at the end of the sample B and C laugh. I cannot hear A laugh, so I have to assume that he has not interpreted what is said in the same way as B and C, but perhaps this is unjust. Perhaps speaker A smiles and this would allow for an alternative interpretation.