In order to communicate successfully, speakers of English must be able to distinguish between the sounds of the language. For instance, they must be able to produce and hear the difference between minimal pairs such as tap and tab, or tap and bap. For these two pairs it is necessary for the listener to be able to distinguish between the bilabial plosives // and //. Affricates, fricatives and plosives are considered to be obstruents and they are thus called because during production there is an obstruction of the airflow in the nose or mouth which causes friction or closure (Giegerich 1995). They can be voiced or voiceless and so pairs can be distinguished by the absence or presence of vocal fold vibration. This can be said to explain how speakers of English distinguish between tap and tab, or tap and bap. However, in English 'phonologically voiced stops are rarely voiced phonetically, and when they are, they are very rarely fully voiced' (Shockey 2003: 30). The same can be said of all voiced obstruent phonemes in English. So if voiced obstruent phonemes are sometimes fully voiced, sometimes partially voiced and sometimes voiceless, is it correct to distinguish pairs of obstruent phonemes by the phenomenon of voicing and moreover, how are English speakers able to tell the difference if pairs of obstruent phonemes are not distinguishable by voicing?
In English R.P., / / are always voiceless, as are / /. However, / / which are described as being voiced, are not fully voiced in all contexts and indeed there can be very little voicing, particularly in word initial and word final position (Roach, 1991). It can therefore be understood why linguists might find the terms voiced and voiceless as unsatisfactory. Word medial obstruents can be voiced (for example // in table) but there is only partial voicing if the phoneme occurs before or after a pause or next to a voiceless phoneme (O'Connor 1973: 131). In fact, Brown (1990: 27) marks the chapter headings in her book as '"voiced"' and '"voiceless"', placing them in inverted commas to indicate the phonological difficulty that exists with these terms. The terms fortis and lenis have been suggested as an alternative and instead of concentrating on the voicing phenomenon, this concentrates on the force of articulation. Fortis sounds are said to be produced with greater force and no voicing, lenis sounds are produced with less force and are 'potentially voiced' (Collins and Mees 2003: 50). However, as Roach (1991) highlights, it is very hard to measure and therefore prove force of articulation and so we can only accept that this alternative term might be applicable. Giegerich (1995) does not think that the terms fortis and lenis are an ideal alternative and prefers the terms [ voice]. This is because, much as the terms [ voice] do not fully describe what is being produced in all contexts, neither do the terms fortis and lenis.
No matter what terms we use to describe these differences between obstruent pairs, speakers of English do successfully communicate, although native speakers do not necessarily realise how they are doing this. As changing a phoneme might change the meaning of a word it is important that there is no confusion between // and // (for example pea and bee) or // and // (for example tied and died). In English, there are alternative ways of differentiating between // and //, even when // is not fully voiced, (Shockey 2003) and other pairs of obstruents. These ways can explain why Giegerich (1995) feels that the terms fortis and lenis are not a suitable substitution for the terms [ voice] in all contexts, because they do not describe the full picture (or sound in this case).
The lack of a constant voicing contrast between English obstruent phonemes is not a feature common to all languages. A French, // for example is always fully voiced, where 'vibration commences prior to release and continues into the articulation of the following vowel' (Harris 1994: 133). An English // can be neutral, 'where closure release and the onset of voicing coincide' (Harris 1994: 133). However, this is the same as for a French // and so confusion for a non-native speaker of English would not be surprising. In French // is always voiceless unaspirated (as in peau) and // is always fully voiced (as in beau) (Harris 1994: 135). In English // is sometimes fully voiced, partially voiced or devoiced and whereas // is always voiceless, it is accompanied by aspiration in syllable initial CV contexts (Shockey 2003), which is vital for speakers to notice. This comparison highlights why the term [ voice] is inadequate and why only English obstruents have the fortis-lenis distinction applied, as there is the need for a term which accommodates the phenomenon for potential voicing present in English.
Again, all voiceless obstruents are voiceless in word final position, but voiced obstruents show little voicing, unless the neighbouring sound is voiced (Ladefoged 1982). In order to tell the difference between minimal pairs such as safe and save the preceding vowel sound is important. This is because 'vowels are shorter before all voiceless consonants than before all voiced consonants' (Ladefoged 1982: 58), otherwise known as pre-fortis clipping. This can be illustrated in the following diagram:
The same applies to all plosives, fricatives and affricates termed to be voiced, but which may be fully voiced, or partially voiced in syllable final position (Gimson 1994). The plosives / / might not always be fully voiced, but the preceding vowel keeps its full length. Compare for example bung and bunk and notice that there is pre-fortis clipping in bunk but that bung retains a full vowel length. With voiceless plosives this observation does not only apply to vowel length. When one of / / are followed by one of / /, / / will be shortened (Roach 1991). An illustration of this is mall and malt.
Pre-fortis clipping is not the only phenomenon for distinguishing phonemes in word final position. The voiced affricate // in cadge for instance will not only be preceded by a longer vowel length than its voiceless counterpart // in catch but it will also be produced with fuller voicing (Brown 1990: 33). This is a similar case for plosives. The // in [] is preceded by a longer vowel sound than in bit. However, here the // is produced with tight voicing and there is also some glottalization before the // which is not present in bid (Harris 1994: 226). This glottalization only appears with voiceless plosives in syllable final position (Giegerich 1995). It is both glottalization and pre-fortis clipping which distinguishes // from // ([] vs. [] Harris 1994).
As discussed, voicing '...is not a feature that can be entirely and exclusively relied upon in the determination of obstruent phonemes' (Giegerich 1995: 224) as it does not provide a true description of what happens in English. As discussed, French voiced obstruent phonemes are always voiced and voiceless obstruents are always voiceless. However English obstruents labelled as voiced are not always fully voiced and are sometimes even voiceless. English listeners rely on features such as aspiration, pre-fortis clipping and glottalization to tell the difference between pairs of obstruent phonemes in syllable initial and final position. For example, it is not voicing that the English listener relies on to distinguish plosives, but aspiration (syllable initial position) and pre-fortis clipping (as also applies for fricatives and affricates) and glottalization (syllable final position). Whilst the feature of fortis and lenis is particularly useful for distinguishing voiced and voiceless fricatives in syllable initial position, it is not a suitable alternative for the terms voiced and voiceless in all contexts, as the listener of English relies on other features as mentioned above. However, the feature of voicing is not a constant contrast either and yet this is the term used to distinguish English obstruent phonemes. In conclusion, as O'Connor states, the listener of English 'shouldn't concentrate on one feature' (1973: 133) for all contexts. It should also be noted that these findings are based on RP accents of English. In Scottish and Lancashire accents for example, / / are barely aspirated and so it is in fact very hard for listeners to hear the difference between / / and / / (O'Connor 1973).