For this task I will look briefly at the concepts of multimodal discourse and semiotics then use this framework to analyse the advertisement for the Citroen C4 car which turns into a dancing robot.
Multimodal refers to different methods of meaning making, linguistic, visual, audio, gestural, and spatial. (van Leeuwen, 2003). A multimodal approach to discourse allows us to view individual modes in relation to each other, rather than as single items. (Cook, 2001).
Semiotics is the study of how meaning is created through the interpretation of signs. A sign is a unit of meaning which may be a word, a sound or a visual image. (Streeter, 2005). Semiotics enables us to see that the meaning we carry away from any discourse is not transmitted to us but is created by us through our interpretation. (Chandler, 2002).
In the Citroen advertisement the image of the robot does not make us interpret the car as an actual robot but creates the context for interpreting the car within the confines of prior, possibly unconscious, knowledge. (Cook, 2001). The advertiser exploits this knowledge in different ways.
Firstly exploiting the knowledge of those receivers, viewers, for whom the robot is iconic, resembling the popular 1980s toy Transformer, bringing to their interpretation a symbol of youth, fun, and a perception of a technologically advanced product.
Secondly, exploiting a more general knowledge, many people associate funky music and dancing with enjoyment. Awareness that the dance moves were created by Justin Timberlake's choreographer (The Reel, 2004) is not necessary for interpretation but may be significant in appealing to subconscious awareness of this style. Interpretation will not be beyond the reach of these receivers, any sign will mean different things to different people. (Chandler, 2002). Interpretation is based on personal experience as well as social and cultural conventions. Silver is the most popular car colouring in the UK (Finlay, 2004) so the choice of silver here exploits a social trend.
Connotation being the cultural meaning we give to a sign this robot connotes technological efficiency and pleasure. (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2001).
The words accompanying the advertisement appear on screen simultaneously with a digital voice, reinforcing the technology message. The meaning of these linguistic items is enhanced by the visual and sound elements preceding them. The words 'alive' and 'technology' are used as visual and audio puns. (Cook, 2001).
The paradigmatic choice of 'alive with technology' compared with the less effective, but equally possible, 'alive with nuts and bolts' impacts on interpretation. The latter connotes something less technological and so less desirable.
The advertisement also helps illustrate how the participants are part of the context. For example, the musicians' name, 'Rhythm les Digitales', provides a subtle link to technology not apparent to many receivers. Combined with the Justin Timberlake and Transformer links, this may impact on the creator's perception of their advertisement and influence their presentation to the client.
Limiting this mode of analysis is the practical inability to display any co-text, the surrounding advertisements or programmes, and broadcast time. (Cook, 2001). Even so we have seen how exploitation of our knowledge may occur without our awareness and this may allow us to judge if such exploitation is acceptable.