This essay will first consider the terms varieties of English and equal, before assessing the statement 'all varieties of English are equal'. I will suggest that language and society are so intertwined that it is impossible to understand one without the other and that this intricate link makes it possible for all varieties of English to be intrinsically equal while being perceived as different. I will discuss linguistic variety and regional and social variations as they affect language use by applying knowledge of the linguistic and social factors involved.
The term variety refers to language use in context. All varieties of any language have a set pattern of use related to complex, rule-based, structures known to, and used within a specific speech community. (Trudgill, 2000). A speech community is a group of people who share a variety providing a means of communication and a means of identity. (Trask, 1999).
Further, the term variety is useful in negating the need to distinguish between language and dialect. If two people using different systems to communicate understand each other using those systems they are speaking dialects of the same language. This is mutual intelligibility. The two systems must also show similarity in the linguistic items of pronunciation, grammar, and vocabulary. (Crystal 1997). Within this framework we can say English is a language made up of a set of dialects that are mutually intelligible and share linguistic similarities.
The word equal may be interpreted with regard to a variety's intrinsic value as a human faculty or as it relates to a variety's value as perceived by society.
Applying the above interpretation it is not possible to say that any one variety is more grammatical, more logical, or more linguistically superior to any other. As a means of communication any variety is valid to the speech community within which it is used. By sharing rules and expectations the community members are given a sense of belonging, sharing a variety maintains identity and solidarity, it does not make any group more superior or 'correct' than any other. (Trask, 1999).
The intricate link between society and language however means variety cannot be determined by linguistic features alone. Features of regional variation may tell us a person's geographical background and features of social variation may indicate a person's place in society in terms of class, ethnicity, age and gender. (Crystal, 2003).
Before examining those features it is necessary to consider Standard English. This is the prestige variety used in the political, educational, administrative and legal systems of the English speaking world, most particularly in its written form. It is highly codified, that is systematic accounts exist by means of dictionaries and grammars. Those using it are seen as educated, successful and superior, yielding to the prestige notion of a standard variety. Emigration has resulted in standard varieties of American, New Zealand, Australian etc English. Non-standard forms have typically been seen as inferior to standards and often become stigmatised through negative attitudes frequently connected to accent and dialect. The use of the standard on radio and television has furthered the notion of 'correct' speech rather than furthered its actual use. (Wardaugh, 2002).
(Accent refers to a speaker's pronunciation, dialect refers to features of grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation. (Yule, 1996).)
This notion of 'correctness' carries the underlying perception that non-standard varieties are sub-standard. This leads to complaints about language use, 'the complaint tradition', where it is common to hear criticism of non-standard varieties, written and spoken. An example is a popular book by Lynne Truss highlighting concerns over standards of punctuation. (Truss, 2004). This is a good example of how attitudes to language use are socially, rather than linguistically, defined. Attitudes borne of ignorance and prejudice label some varieties sub-standard because of their association with groups of low social status. (Holmes, 2001).
An example is African American Vernacular English (AAVE) spoken by some Black Americans. AAVE is as communicatively effective as any other variety but its association with a lower status group, through historic and political events, has resulted in discrimination against its speakers. (Howard, 2005). Milroy and Milroy (1999) offer a parallel in the UK, with the urban working class dialects of Liverpool, London, Birmingham and Glasgow.
As with any variety AAVE provides its speakers with status within their group. It is a symbol of group identity, but as it is considered by authority to be sub-standard, many speakers use Standard American English in certain contexts, particularly writing. This illustrates that people know different varieties of their language and use them according to social context. (Baron, 2005). It is this symbol of identity which helps to explain why people continue to use non-standard varieties when they perceive the standard to be 'proper'.
Although we have enormous choice when speaking or writing we are generally constrained by our linguistic knowledge and our perception of social acceptability and appropriateness. Holmes (2001) describes these choices as being a part of our linguistic repertoire, a knowledge acquired largely subconsciously through exposure rather than learnt in the way which may be required for more formal varieties, especially the written form. This knowledge includes the regional variety which gives us our geographical identity marking us as originating from a particular place. For example people speaking to their doctor speak differently than to their butcher, as the butcher speaks differently to his mechanic than to another butcher, and all of them speak differently at home than at work or in social settings. Similarly they will each modify their language to the company they are in, swearing freely with their friends but never in front of women perhaps. Each may make different linguistic choices when in his native locality if he now lives elsewhere. The linguistic choices we make then, the vocabulary we use, the grammatical construction, and the sounds we produce will match the social context of any given situation. (Holmes, 2001).
In observing language in context, data collection and analysis has been problematic due to what Labov terms the observer paradox. People speak differently when they know they are being observed because they become acutely aware of what they are saying. This in itself shows the social influence of language choice as participants have a strong desire to 'say the right thing'. (Mesthrie et al, 2000).
Studies by Labov et al, 1968 in New York, and by Milroy and Milroy, 1977 in Belfast, used procedures designed to minimise this paradox by reducing the social distance of the interviewer from the participant so that interviewers became observers of groups. The presence of groups has been found to diminish the effect of observance. (Milroy and Milroy, 1999). Well documented studies by Labov, 1963 in Martha's Vineyard, and Trudgill, 1972 in Norwich, have given insights into the links between class and other social categories. For example the way people report their use of prestigious varieties and how they actually use them. Trudgill (1972) discovered that women tend to over report their use of prestige forms and men tend to under report their usage preferring to indicate that they use less prestigious varieties.
The relationship between language and behaviour in vocabulary choice is emphasised in the use of gender biased words, insulting names resulting from racial hatred and other denigrating lexical choices based on attitude. It is not always the meaning of the words which gives rise to offence it is the way they are used. Women and minority groups are often spoken about using lexis which is devaluing. The word bitch on its own has no negative connotation but used in relation to a woman is derogatory. As is the term darkie in reference to a person of African descent. The use of male-oriented vocabulary, chairman, salesman, mankind, is said to reflect and reinforce the low status of women in society. (Crystal, 2004)
It follows that gender is not a biological issue and race not a colour one, both are social issues. (Labov, 2002). Labov writes:
Labov's words show us how important gender is in language choice. The way women and men are spoken about and the way they speak impacts on linguistic choice. Trudgill's Norwich study showed men and women seem to respond differently to standards imposed on society in general. Labov (1969) says women are more sensitive to overt prestige than men, and men more sensitive to covert prestige. Trudgill (1972) goes further, suggesting that women are socially insecure and so use prestige forms to elevate themselves. Gordon (1997) argues that woman's behaviour is associated with avoiding being seen as 'lower class' rather than with the desire to be seen as 'higher class'.
Important factors in linguistic variety are changes which diffuse through the groups making up society. Greater population mobility blending dialects is an example. Age impacts on the rate of change, particularly vocabulary. (Crystal, 2004). Referring to radio as  wireless signposts a person's age. Differences are more marked between grandparents and grandchildren even when they belong to the same social class. (Yule, 1996). The social variables of class, gender, ethnicity, and age, therefore, affect our use of language, indicating that we are socially conditioned to use speech within situational contexts. (Kerswill, 2004.)
To conclude - linguistically, and with regard to its intrinsic value to society as a whole, all varieties of English are equal. However, there remains linguistic discrimination even though it is based on ethnic, racial, class, and age differences, against which it is illegal to discriminate. (Milroy and Milroy, 1999). The belief that one variety is inherently superior to any other is based on social factors enhanced by institutional prejudices borne from historical and geographical accidents of where power lay at a crucial time in history. Thus, all varieties of English, by virtue of the attitudinal value judgements society places upon them, are not socially equal.