Experiments have shown that chimps can use signs (Fromkin et al, 2003). To determine if this means they have language it is necessary to define language.
Language can be described within a set of design features (Trask, 1995). I will look briefly at each feature in turn.
1. Duality. Sign, and spoken, language require gestures and sounds to be formed in a grammatical sequence using a combination of different elements. Individually these gestures and sounds have no meaning, it is the way in which they are combined that makes them meaningful. For example: 'Wants for Jack walk a go'. This is a possible sequence but it makes no sense unless it is uttered as, 'Jack wants to go for a walk'. It is not necessary to learn this sequence in order to use it. The knowledge of the rules of our language allows us to choose the correct sequence. This combination of a limited number of meaningless sounds to produce any number of meaningful utterances is known as duality (Trask, 1995).
2. Displacement. The notion of displacement enables us to communicate how we felt yesterday or what we would like to do tomorrow. It removes us from the here and now and allows us to discuss ideas not related to our present situation or placement.
3. Open-endedness. This means we can understand things which are completely new, things we have never heard before. If we heard, 'The French now speak Russian', we wouldn't necessarily believe it but we would understand it.
4. Spontaneity and stimuli. We can respond to any remark in any number of ways. When we say, 'Jack wants to go for a walk', we could respond by saying, 'Take him', or 'So what?' it is our choice. We could respond with 'G reen cheese' and although it makes no sense in this context it is still available to us as a response. Thus, whatever stimulus provokes us we are not restricted in our response.
Chimpanzees Washoe and Nim Chimpsky have been taught to use a limited number of signs (Fromkin et al, 2003). Washoe combined two signs to create 'you drink' or 'gimme flower'. Nim produced three signs to utter 'play me Nim'. Nim was recorded using a 16-sign sequence which simply repeated his two-sign sequences (Fromkin et al, 2003). Although these utterances could be said to have some meaning they have no syntactic structure. The chimpanzees are unable to form their signs in a meaningful sequence. Neither did they show the ability to communicate outside of their immediate needs or to use their signs to create new combinations which could be described as open-endedness. Nim rarely signed spontaneously, 12% of his responses were spontaneous (Fromkin et al, 2003). He reacted to stimuli by responding to his trainers rather than creating a meaningful sequence of signs of his own.
To conclude, in defining language by the creativity which is duality, displacement, open-endedness, and spontaneity, we are assigning it solely to humans. In no experiments have chimpanzees displayed all of these features so I conclude that chimpanzees do not have language.
By the time the normal developing child reaches school age he is able to comprehend and produce his own language in such a manner as to be communicatively viable. His development will continue but the basics of his sound system and his vocabulary are formed by now.
The child is aware that the sounds he hears have meaning but he is unlikely to be aware of the segmental nature of those sounds. Small differences in the sounds will convey meaning without the child needing to know what these differences signify. It is only when a child is learning to read and write that he becomes aware of these sounds as separate words or syllables. Garton and Pratt (1989) make this point of children's understanding of the word 'word' where, until they learn to read, children have difficulty separating the meaning of a word from its linguistic entity. For example they will identify noun phrases as 'words', such as 'the big man'. Similarly a long word could be 'train' because of the image the child has of a train. In learning to read the child is learning the arbitrary nature of words and will come to understand that they do not have a direct relationship to what they represent. (Garton and Pratt, 1989)
The child has to learn the symbols which represent the sounds he knows before he can read and he has to learn how to form those symbols in order to write. He also has to make the connection that what he reads he can also write and that the two represent the sounds he understands (Bryant & Bradley, 1985).
As we use spoken language for many different purposes, so we use reading and writing. Children do not automatically associate the writing of words on paper as conveying a message and need to be taught this association in terms of the sounds they make being represented by the characters on the page. At the same time they need to learn the motor skills needed for writing, how to hold the pen, how much pressure to apply, how to position the paper, and even how to move the pen and paper but not themselves. They also need to be made aware of the functional use of writing, who they are writing for and why. Crystal (1997) notes that writing is an integral part of the learning process and not separate from it.
When children learn to write they are forming individual characters and come to understand that in sequence those characters represent the sounds they know. This helps them to realise the arbitrary nature of words and they come to understand the association between reading, writing, and speaking.
In this way we can see that the ability to use the spoken language does not automatically confer the ability to read and write. Reading and writing are skills which require a combination of a variety of skills and are separate from, though inexorably linked to, the innateness of the human ability to use spoken language.
The natural errors adults make in their speech often go unnoticed by the speaker. When they are noticed they often cause amusement to both speaker and listener who little realise their errors are not random. Errors appear to follow a pattern which can provide an insight into how language is processed.
By analysing naturally occurring errors we can identify units of speech production as psychologically real. Speech errors occur in all units of production; sentences, phrases, words, morphemes, syllables, phonemes. They may appear as exchanges, substitutions, reversals, movements or mis-selections and show us the advance-planning nature of speech production (Fletcher, 2004).
For example reading list becomes leading list suggesting a phonemic awareness in planning which has gone wrong resulting in this consonant anticipation occurring. We find that consonants never exchange for vowels and we get fill the pool as fool the pill in vowel reversal (Fletcher, 2004). This suggests that consonants and vowels are separate and real units in planning. In a phrasal exchange we get I got into this guy with a discussion for I got into a discussion with this guy. Perhaps the speaker meant to say I got into this discussion with a guy. This still indicates pre-planning and an awareness of syntactic organisation, but the error is now a word exchange. It also shows that by defining one target we may be limiting our conclusions about what errors are occurring.
We also see syllable exchanges like thirth and forth for third and forth and cluster exchanges like stee franding for free standing (Garman, 1990). In selecting a morpheme we may apply an error but we will still apply the correct phonological rule to that error. This is seen more clearly in you have to square it facely for you have to face it squarely where the morpheme ly has not moved with its stem.
The awareness of syntactic organisation is highlighted by phrasal exchanges where noun phrases always exchange with noun phrases and verb phrases with verb phrases. Syllable exchanges too maintain their structure, an initial syllable exchanges with an initial syllable, a medial with a medial, and a final with a final.
Tip of the tongue phenomena provides an insight into how we store and retrieve language. We may recall the meaning of an intended word but not its form. As a result we begin a search during which we will most likely retrieve information such as the initial letter or sound, the ending, the syllable formation or structure, or any suffixes. This suggests that these different units are stored in different parts for retrieval in a procedure which is sometimes interrupted. The search may result in the word being found or it may need to be revealed. This suggests that we have distinct levels of processing in language retrieval and so in its production (Garman, 1990).
To conclude, naturally occurring speech errors provide a window on the adult speaker's language processes by showing us the points at which the system breaks down and thus allowing us to see how and where the breakdown has occurred (Garman, 1990).