This essay begins with brief descriptions of two approaches to investigating males' and females' ways of talking, the variationist's and the language and gender approaches. It then concentrates on language and gender by discussing the theories of deficiency, dominance, and difference and considers the concepts of language as a gendered system and communicative competence where they provide an analytical tool for investigating these theories. Exampled are investigations and resulting suggestions for differences found. Also considered is the relatively new post-modern, or social constructionist, perspective. The focus is on English due to space restrictions.
The three theories discussed above are not confined within strict boundaries and each may influence the other. While the dominance and difference theories predominated through the 1980s and 1990s there is a fourth perspective variously referred to as dynamic or social constructionist (Coates, 2004), or post-modern (Cameron, 2005). For clarity this essay will refer to it as post-modern because it will be referring mainly to Cameron (2005) who favours this use.
A point made by Cameron is that neither the dominance nor the difference theories allow for the diverse nature of gender. Gender can no longer be viewed as binary. This shift relates not just to theoretical changes but must be linked to social changes as gender is no longer seen only as a male/female construct. Although this may always have been true it is only relatively newly acknowledged and the argument is that this concept requires new approaches.
Cameron (ibid: 491) points to research into the language of drag queens by Barrett (1995), and of telephone sex-workers by Hall (1995) where features of Lakoff's woman's language emerged in the construction of subjects identities. Other researchers, Cameron (ibid: 492) mentions, Baxter (2003) and Coates (1996, 2003), amongst others, have focussed on gendered performances within specific groups or individuals and have shown speakers to change their position -influenced by the potential perception of themselves which they portray to others.
Eckert & McConnell-Ginet (1999) suggest that the performance of gender cannot be seen only as a negotiation of relationships between genders but also within genders. Men and women construct and deconstruct their identities as they resolve issues of participation in the various contexts in which they interact, same sex or cross-sex. They refer to 'communities of practice' which they define as 'groups whose joint engagement in some activity or enterprise is sufficiently intensive to give rise over time to a repertoire of shared practice' (ibid: 185).
A final aspect Cameron (2005) discusses is economic globalisation which sees men and women sharing more communities of practice. Her own research uncovered a 'feminized' (Cameron, 2000) style among British call centre workers suggesting a recognition of women's speech style as empathetic and so desirable in terms of the situational context of a customer relations interaction.
The theories of language and gender discussed focus on the interactional and multifunctional nature of language and, with the exception of Lakoff's (1975) original intuition based work, contextualise gender through actual language use.
The differences between men's and women's ways of talking have been seen to be systematic but the explanations for these systematic differences cannot definitively be said to conform to only a hierarchal dominance position or only to cultural differences
The post-modern approach suggests that the identity people create for themselves through their language is not fixed by a set of social variables which is adhered to for life, but maintains a fluidity which relies on a perception of language within a multifunctional framework and allows an identity to be constructed and deconstructed as people move between communities of practice.
The social change which has seen today's generation of males and females more similar to each other than in earlier generations in terms of clothing, education, job prospects, and general life choices, has been recognised in the shift of the focus of study from the qualities which identify a man and a woman to social practice. The result has been cultural explanations of language use balanced with interactionally focussed data and explanations.
The conclusion is that as the roles of men and women in the modern world become even more multi-functional and even less gender-defined, communication will become more flexible and it will become more difficult to separate gender from other social identities. Maintaining presupposed categories of gender and linguistic behaviour will not allow for the diversity of expression these roles demand so that the interweaving of theories is inevitable and new theories will continue to emerge.