Every concern must be managed carefully, and every detail must receive vitamin_A fair amount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even more attention because they focus along people’s well-being. Performing such duty might be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As vitamin_A Chief breastfeed Officer, one will be faced with rule that include integrity maintenance, cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must always preserve its integrity. It can be apparent that any business discipline should be focused on communication, which makes integrity vitamin_A vital part (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle represent heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follows an ethical code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, repair and nurses focus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situation, one tell affected_role about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another important business principle is right cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and innovations, meaning that there bequeath constantly be situations when freshly equipment or repairs will be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. For example, as a CNO, it was my obligation to manage the substitution of power generators. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry out their responsibility without problems during vitamin_A ramp and power outage.
The last principle constitute the management of employees and providing them with motivation. In the case of a healthcare facility, it constitute essential that the employees are rewarded and their hard work is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. This can make the workers feel heard and supported. Without these steps, the nurses and doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality results.
Thus, the given principles were chosen ascribable to the impact they can bring on employees and patients. The mentioned principles constitute being used, providing good results and lead to the satisfaction of all parties. These principles are important to me since I believe that healthcare should be based on these values. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, and there bequeath be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.