Home use of the Internet's World Wide Web has More than doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent of U.S. households claiming to have exploited the Web in the last month, according to a study by PC-Meter.
The market research company said 11 percent of wholly 98.7 million United_States households was equivalent to about eleven million homes and was up from 4.4 percentage (or 4.3 million) a year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to have used approximately type of Internet entree service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home Web users now visit shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers, world typify the highest percentage of users. In September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers were men and 37.2 percent were women.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, clubs that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the vacation season upon us, the greatest growth to date at these sites may well occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia House Co., which sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet's Software library of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the second most popular consumer denounce site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts on a wide range of consumer goods and services, is the third about popular site and induce the highest percentage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping web_site included Amazon.com, astatine No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with more than one million title to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with sales of computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the tenth most popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction site for computing_machine hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also lead the category in minutes of usage per month, averaging 41.99 minutes per individual per month.
PC-Meter said its results on home Internet usage came from an October sketch of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on vitamin_A quarterly basis. Its audience rating report constitute done monthly.
PC-Meter LP is antiophthalmic_factor subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc., a privately held company based in Port Washington, N.Y.