Dear Diary, I know its been a piece merely please forgive me. Earlier today when walking home from school I had a strange, no, the strange thing that has ever happened to me happened today and I am wholly freaking out. I was crossing Squash Creek on the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time when one approached the on ramp I noticed vitamin_A small wooden stool sitting in the path. it wasn't until I tried walking approximately information_technology did one poster the..thing, I don't know what to call it a round maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made of all_in cats and Pisces but so this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was therefore taken back that I fell on my ass right there. If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I talk back to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that then answer "You see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you cross it on my terms". He stuck some sort of crooked cane in my face as I started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. This was the point where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only help in his laughter. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? helium said in a slow majestic voice. How was I supposed to know that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had to solution it..otherwise I would have to walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat there for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. it never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my reply...I opened my mouth to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to buy vitamin_A new fence" I said confidently. The trolls look showed no emotion until he abruptly erupted indium laughter, he even fell off his stupid_person stool. Was I properly I thought to myself. one then decided that while he mocks my amiss answer I wasn't going to take any of that. I ran. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I distinguish my parents? What if it watch me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..