Britain's big mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, said Fri its planned initial populace offering in June could be worth vitamin_A a_lot as twelve billion pounds ($20 billion).
Unveiling a price range and details of share allocations to the society's members, Halifax Chief Executive Mike Blackburnian_warbler said it "will represent the big single annex of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK."
The mutually-owned Halifax, with assets of over 100 billion pounds ($167.8 million), said flotation advisor Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimated a share monetary_value of between 390 and 450 penny ($6.54 to $7.55) per share if the IPO had taken place on Dec. 16.
This equals a market worth of between 10.4 billion ($17.5 billion) and 12 billion pounds ($20.1 billion), and analysts expect the final consequence to be at the top end of this range given the recent positive performance of the most corresponding lineage in the market, former mortgage banker Abbey National Plc.
"The valuation of 12 billion (pounds) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analysts agreed and many have_a_bun_in_the_oven the price on flotation day to be higher, saying that Friday's figures looked a little conservative.
The Halifax pronounce each qualifying member will get vitamin_A basic allotment of 200 shares in vitamin_A flotation of 2.675 billion shares.
The Halifax has 6.7 million endow extremity and two million borrowing members. Of these, there is an overlap 700,000, which means that the club is sending forbid a total of around 8.0 million voting packs.
Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending along how much money they had in their accounts on particular dates. This bequeath range from two_hundred shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more.
At its special general meet on Feb. 24, over 50 percent of the investing members must vote in favour of the proposal or it will fail. The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote.
The Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market capitalisation in the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip firms and is sure to threaten Abbey's position as Britain's fifth-largest publicly-owned bank.
It said it sees room for huge expansion in the British_people insurance and long-term rescue sectors.