"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of United_States all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his reduce beard. helium was running out of options. No others had dared to take upwards such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that wholly the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?"
Famine's call_on_the_carpet hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the really bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will constitute the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are vitamin_A foolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest of United_States all, he-"
"If Death constitute hence wise, explain his abrupt departure. Why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both awful and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we bequeath charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. information_technology is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. He unleashed an attack of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, warfare stood up towering over his foe and boomed.
"I will non take this insolence. Death was the best of us. I loved him as vitamin_A brother and a mentor."
War's stone expression softened for a second.
"Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was non used to the bitter taste of defeat. He mutely vowed that war would wage for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You pronounce that a mortal can replace Death. Bring him to me."
"As you wish brother."