MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system plan by NextWave to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity to offer religious_service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will buy at least 10 million minutes of capacity for its personal communication_theory services from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of the batch were not disclosed.
Personal communications services represent the new generation of celluar communication_theory services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help underpin the financial hereafter of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the United_States Federal communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plan to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out of the auctions for United_States PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave pact and previous smaller deals, MCI has motivate to go a major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide personal_computer footprint for MCI and represents an important conterminous step in MCI's radio_receiver strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own its own wireless facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for extra agreements it expects to sign with other wireless supplier as part of its radio_receiver interconnected network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full_moon range of wireless services and features that will be integrated into MCI's existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically favored to resell communications services initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. complete time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan pronounce MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI along the wireless communications map in a big way."
Still, he noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T radio_receiver unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains doubly as large as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic regions traverse 207 million potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's stock traded at $25.25 a divvy_up Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.