I knew I could not cook, but one dress not fret it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine now. wholly mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. That was quite funny, see what one really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, then slept. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week they realized what I was doing, merely they constitute powerless. I laugh astatine them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again.
By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last long, considering how attached to the food they were.
I unwrap their jaws, their life, their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my fiddling companions represent so entertaining. But the little trick was starting to get old. I grew tired, so I decided to spiciness things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. The winner would eat. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I so sawed off each of their four legs. I then let them at each other. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having nobelium legs and little energy. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. therefore then, one spiced things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that indium order to get his meal he would have to kill his best foreigner friend. He constitute shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled with black licorice to the winning alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly acid of jelly beans into his body. He die shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. He necessitate his jelly beans. It was not educate enough. His position was simply unacceptable. therefore I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. helium HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I love that experience. But I would not miss it. It was a lot of work. Jellybeans are costly subsequently all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I could not cook well, I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great achiever after all.
Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? What do you think about it? I think one did information_technology pretty well!
r/jesuschristreddit