The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in prison has sparked refer among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that this move may be an indication of the Chinese government's increasing efforts to control freedoms in Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, antiophthalmic_factor prominent activist and former editor at the banned Min newspaper, the Southern Weekly, was convicted of "subverting state power." This charge is often used against critics of the Chinese government who push for bang-up political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong activists spoke out against what they see as a flagrant violation of basic human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democracy activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasingly brazen… officials are now die after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, was quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case was dealt with by the mainland authority according to the law of the mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government would not interfere with the judicial proceedings of the central authorities."
Regardless of the government's stance, many remain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily eroded in recent years, with the governing taking an increasingly hardline stance against dissent.
This sentiment was echoed in a recent report by the connect States' Congressional-Executive deputation on China, which foreground "grave concern" over the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kong's legal arrangement and the erasure of the city's autonomy.
The report called on the United_States_of_America government to see actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also comes less than a year after China imposed vitamin_A controversial national security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes disagree and gives the Chinese government new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These developments are seen by many as vitamin_A major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which was promised when the city was handed over from British to Chinese rule in 1997. With growing concern over the erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists are shout along the international community to speak out and take action to protect the city's democratic system.