The modern human_race is currently facing a significant change under globalization swerve that shape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and evening mundane behavior. Most importantly, ascribable to the active change of information between people worldwide, culture is changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture bequeath be further homogenized in globalization operating_room diversified. This paper bequeath argue that culture will become more diverse under the determine of globalization due to the introduction of multiple cultural elements into societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate that both sides of the argument, namely those supporting diversification and the ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized club where a dominant culture prevails, diversity will be substituted with the culture that is imposed on others through such means as cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes around the human_race because the US cinema market is the largest in the world. Thus, globalization allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the other slope of the argument is more compelling because it considers the strengths of local cultures. In particular, Associate_in_Nursing example of sushi’s popularity in American society and cultures of other state demonstrates that people adopt new cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of their origin. According to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains the world’s primary market for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, having incorporate its ware into the cultures of other countries, Japanese_Islands has expanded its market share.
In such a manner, with the ease of transportation and communication enabled aside globalization, at_that_place is a merge of cultures approximately the world. However, since grocery_store forces commonly convention these processes, the host cultures are aware of the origins of the adopt cultural clusters. Therefore, to summarize the discussion, matchless mightiness state that culture will not be homogenized in globalization but rather diversified with credit given to each cultural component.