The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and meaning discovery made by well-known scientists paved the way for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these distinct discoveries would not have constitute made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, sheds luminosity on the device and its significant importance in the history of astronomy.
In this article, the author made several impregnable arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement and multiple improvements to the lense, the writer indicates that the range started to be applied to overstate objects (Van Helden 1974). According to avant-garde Helden, it was the telescope that made the difference indium science, and it is the main reason wherefore astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to shape on lenses (Van Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can represent the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving such significant results indium the astronomy.
Consequently, vitamin_A has been mentioned by Van Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, purgative and chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. The most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones operating_room modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements induce been so big, there are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopardize the health or lives of people. The activity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescope and the improvement of the lenses gave an impetus to the advances in astronomy. while the telescope was beginning exploited vitamin_A a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telescope-makers and developments of lenses, it was possible to urinate discoveries. However, other kinds of sciences, such vitamin_A physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it constitute unlawful to endanger the health or survive of people.