The stark chords of Tosca begin once again; Scarpia's motive is the first thing the audience at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they constitute jaded by it, but it still elicits within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'll see entrances from Cavaradossi and of course our leading lady, Tosca, forced to do the atrocious and murder one man to try and save another's life. Poor Tosca; if only she induce known that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution, perhaps she would have accepted Scarpia's demand for intimacy.
The people will then shambling out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that they've seen wholly too often here in Milan, and go out to the cafés and restaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, go_on at their leisurely pace as I sit by in my darkened villa above the streets watching the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine always asked, "Why move to Milan?" "You don't know Italian, do you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all the sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have an answer for them, because they were right to inquiry my motives. Why take to fundamentally change the eternal workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose to stay out until the ungodly hours of 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food is usually spiked with the residual alcoholic_drink from their Lombardy region chardonnay and pinot bianco by the pint. However, even getting past the eternal hangover that is my life, how do I avoid that villainous vegetable that the Italians seem to put in every dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so frequently I took it for granted during my time in Vienna. Stakes could be easily adequate debar with adept planning (an internally locked casket with plenty of reinforced sword between my face and the world that mightiness wish to destroy me), but the Austrians never bothered with garlic quite as often vitamin_A they do here.
Perhaps I mightiness go back to Vienna and dine off the simple people whose beer consumption is admirable as much as it is shameful. Perhaps I will get spinal_column to hearing the operas of Strauss and Mozart, or maybe the occasional performance of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." merely for now, I sit like Tosca, indium a place I should never wish to be waiting for the right moment to urinate my escape and be free again. Now, this never sleeping city of Milan clasp me hostage with the taste of die on everyone's lips.