The social determiner of health constitute the conditions in the environment indium which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I match that the social environment in which people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determine solely aside biologic factors or entree to quality health care (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). Resources that better the quality of life can significantly impact the health of a population.
Examples of these resource include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and health Promotion, n.d.). I besides support the recent shift in the view that it is solely upwards to the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. In the modern_font world, really little depends along the individual. At first glance, he can choose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices that affect health are made aside the marketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to vitamin_A healthy lifestyle. The need to work hard to gain money for these products pushes people to sacrifice a goodly sleep schedule and exercise. This chain induce many links, but the consequence is always the same: people’s health is mostly not up to them. External factors also indirectly affect health, such as health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) report on these inequalities, I constitute most surprised by the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalisation and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. The field of health care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I think that racial and ethnic discrimination in this sphere must be eliminate in the first place.