"Thing is, Nolan, criminal shouldn't feel transgress at being called roaches."
The reporter raised Associate_in_Nursing eyebrow at Maine from across the coffee table. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of us would need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr. Clay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, we got one thing in common with those dirty sons of bitches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you said you're different."
"Tell me, dress you trust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Even as a journalist, I don't always get to—"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and Lashkar-e-Taiba your sins be washed away, as long as you committed them in this OR that year, arbitrarily chosen aside your man in that big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was brought up Christian, you know. Far as I know, lone one fella can pardon you. Humans ain't so forgiving or forgetful."
Nolan's expression become thoughtful. "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty-six people came forward with confessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders in total, on with a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate six of her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't see what's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cats? I'm talking about the math. Eighty murders? There are several times that number of homicides alone in New York City, let unique the state or the country. Doesn't that prove what I've been saying? Criminals don't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six ended upwards being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why, then, constitute you keen on publicity?"
"You're making me blush. I don't know what you're talking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so you confessed."
"Eight, actually. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, but turned a page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park. Fifteen dead, including two police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move; I was only defending myself. Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. But that's nothing compare to the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you were arrested for that."
"Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." I leaned forward and motioned for him to come closer. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real reason behind these pardons?" His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can write this down."
"I think the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, on Americans by Americans. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. Why else would they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you confess, you perplex a reputation. Respect. No, not from local shrimps. The big players. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. Sold a lot of intel to foreign players."
"You didn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I drained my cup of coffee and count at my watch. "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of course. I believe you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest larceny of the century'."
"Man, those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. That's what they get for underestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan nodded and flipped a page. "Let's move to the big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me the scoop?"
I grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be giving you everything, right? You a journalist, do some research. Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I induce some reading to do."
"Sure you do. Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."
We digest and stimulate hands. As I turned to leave, vitamin_A young world whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
I nodded.
He pushed a gun into my chest and opened fire. There was screaming, and a lot of people running, but one couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the same end. You're a big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. Just because the government wouldn't refer you, doesn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took the gun from the young man's hand and held it against my temple. "Next year, when the governing decides 2016 constitute a great year, they wouldn't even hold this against me."
***
*Thanks for reading! dress check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *