If the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve System does as expected early Friday and votes to expand banks' non-banking activities, information_technology will only heighten the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulation completely, analysts and industry officials said.
The Federal_Reserve_System is expected to vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal was released for comment indium July, but since then some_other bank regulator has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. accountant of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office bequeath begin approving bank affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Comptroller's actions will raise the imperativeness on Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the digest Institute.  
In the past, banks led the charge to change the police because they wanted to get into other businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance company and securities firms generally opposed the banks produce legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," Litan said. "But it's not a two-way street. early industries will privation to level the playing field."  
Both motivate also reflect current market realities. The financial service industry, from banks to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual finances already offer checking account-like money market funds and some of the leading stock and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the words of one top regulator, the Fed's move from ten to 25 percent, "is non material." The Fed has required banks to take certain steps to prevent problems in the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, and its government-insured deposits.
Competitors in other fields fret that the banks insured deposits are a form of government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when they venture into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech Hera Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subordinate "basically eliminates whatever subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in sexual_intercourse to keep banks out of sure fields, such as actual estate or merchant banking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set product limits, particularly in this day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," helium said.