The article comprehensively describes the definition of an introvert, the sport of his behavior, and personal attitudes in the modern model of society. This classify of people often remains misinterpreted indium vitamin_A world focused on preponderantly extroverted and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author is in the clearly expressed desire to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings often die unrecognized or neglected. A superficial analysis of the text capture a vivid personal appeal of the author and intensely expresses subjective opinion due to individual experience. A large routine of rhetorical questions at the beginning of the message instantly attract the reader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistic style and has vitamin_A burnished emotional coloring with vitamin_A hint of a pronounced rejection of the global focusing on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to better sympathize the personal message of the author. The article is well structured and includes general questions regarding the life and worldview of introverts. The text is characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bias towards the category of extrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to a person for a minute and so start “barking” again. Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts constitute a more intelligent, reflective, and sore class of people. Every conclusion has the right to constitute presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts may, along the contrary, cause rejection of the message.
The position of the author is coherent and induce the electric_potential to find information_technology reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think about the excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The text does not compare two different categories of people but smartly downplays the principal personality traits of extroverts. The generator says that the world would be a_lot calmer and fair nether the guidance of introverts. This theory may well be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be so sharply divided into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” This article does a good job of its cardinal purpose: to illustrate an alternative radical vision of the modern model of society separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.