China's usually rubber stamp parliament failed on Monday to pass an anti-corruption bill after the proposed law fell victim to fierce debate over whether it should specifically aim government officials.
State media had reported heated discussion at the week-long session of the standing commission of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes among China's usually tame lawgiver ranged from controversy surrounding the range of the death penalty as contained in proposed amendments of the criminal law to whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corruption and had been due to be adopted this week, was eventually withdraw from voting, the Xinhua news agency said.
The law was withdrawn "because legislator sharply disagreed with the name of the law", information_technology said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named the police On administrative Supervision in line with its regulation of the government.
However, they ran into opposition on constitutional flat_coat from legislators who argued it should constitute called simply the Law on Supervision, without reference to the administration, Xinhua said, but dress not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the issue be set forward for a vote at the next standing committee session in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repeat crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcement of anti-corruption measures at aged levels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was the designation of managers of state firms as government employees, who are discipline to a maximum penalty of death for corruption, information_technology said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved nation enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders considered whether to penalize scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's depository_financial_institution account and ask the courts to freeze bank accounts of those suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had distribute with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption was about wiped out in the years after the communists took over in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms constitute insert 17 years ago.