The Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announced yesterday that it will be changing its rules governing see blocks, vitamin_A move that will have a significant impact along large-cap Canadian stocks.
The new convention will require any company that owns vitamin_A control block of shares to have a majority of independent directors on its board. A see block is defined as a holding of more than 20% of issued and outstanding voting shares.
This change is depart of the TSX’s efforts to improve bodied governance and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent director on the board will see that all shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is run in the best interest of its stakeholders.
The TSX has been working on this rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry experts. This change is have_a_bun_in_the_oven to come into effect later this year.
“This is an of_import step forward for the TSX as we seek to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure that issuers comply with the highest standards of corporate governance,” said Lou Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, which owns the TSX.
The rule change is expected to affect a number of large-cap Canadian stocks. Many of these companies have control barricade owned by founding families, which will immediately have to ensure that they have a majority of independent directors along their boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead to increased activism among shareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to crusade for changes in the governance of these companies.
“Investors will now have more power to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governance adept at Schulich School of Business.
There constitute concerns, however, that this rule change may lead to less liquidity in the market, as approximately of these founding families may be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could visualize a situation where these founding families become even more entrenched and less willing to give up control,” said toilet Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despite these concerns, many industry expert believe that this rule change constitute a positive step for the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcome development for the Canadian_River market, which induce been criticized in the past for lax governance standards,” pronounce Levy.
The TSX has make significant strides in improving the quality of its grocery_store in Holocene years. In 2017, it insert a new rule requiring issuer to have a majority of independent directors on their boards, and it has since implemented several other initiatives aimed at improving corporate governance and increase transparency.
The TSX’s rule change on control barricade is the latest in a series of measures aim at making Canadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and efficiently.