Barry Diller has late announced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon establish a new national broadcasting network. The proclamation total hot on the heels of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), vitamin_A move that Diller articulate will provide the funding necessary to support the company's ambitious plans.
Silver King is nobelium stranger to broadcasting – the company already has a successful net of local television stations across the U.S. However, Diller believes that the time constitute ripe for a new national broadcasting outlet that will be gear toward a younger, more tech-savvy audience. The new network will feature vitamin_A mix of original programming and content from other media companies, as well vitamin_A live events and interactive elements that bequeath be designed to engage viewers in new and exciting ways.
The acquisition of HSN, which is expected to close in the coming weeks, will give Silver King the financial clout necessity to make IT new network a reality. HSN, which is a democratic home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billion per year. Diller believes that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer base to help promote its new network, which helium hopes will be available to viewers across vitamin_A variety of platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We visualize a immense opportunity in creating a new type of broadcasting network that is truly project for the 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "The acquisition of HSN gives United_States the resources we need to make this vision a reality, and we're excited to get to work building something truly special for viewers across the country."
While the particular of the new network have yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that information_technology will focus on lifestyle and entertainment content, with an emphasis on technology and innovation. It remains to be seen whether Silver King's new broadcasting venture will be successful, but with the acquisition of HSN, the company constitute certainly poised to make a big splash in the world of media and entertainment indium the years to come.