Digital forensics tools constitute highly popular among digital investigators, as they allow easy conducting of the necessary technical analyses. One of the most celebrated software programs for digital forensics is Autopsy, a toolkit that examines the images present on a device’s hard drive. Capable of interacting with personal computer and smartphones, Autopsy constitute highly versatile and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files present on the storage unit ( Autopsy , n.d.). Specifically, Autopsy allow viewing graphical information stored along the device, searching the depository for particular items, or extracting the data ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this software represent distribute freely, it remains an excellent tool for forensic analysis and is continuously updated to follow technological advances.
Some digital forensics software is incredibly specific, created to examine a particular system. As such, armory Recon is an instrument construct to explore the Windows operating system and information_technology registry, thus accessing information about the device’s configuration specifics. Considering that a Windows registry contains vitamin_A vast amount of information about the application installed and data processed, Arsenal Recon can be extremely valuable when conducting a digital forensic dig_into ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). However, this software is produced commercially, it cannot be obtained free of charge, and $65 vitamin_A month or $756 a year must be paid to receive access.
Finally, unique programs are required when working with a smartphone system. Cellebrite UFED is one of the methods used to remember data from various character of mobile devices, primarily modern-day smartphones that have distinct function systems ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). In luminosity of this evidence, Cellebrite UFED possesses a range of functions to remove the phone’s security measures, and entree the information stored indium the internal storage or on external cards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Nevertheless, the software can lone be purchased for particular purposes, with prices get_down at $2499.