Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, grocery_store sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authority into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it induce no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of the a_la_mode Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no near from the SFO and did not expect to do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had constitute among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock change watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were under investigation in July last year.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned aside Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale Delaware Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian public_utility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practise is to issue poster which require a person or institution to be interviewed or pass over documents, although it can besides apply for a search warrant if it wants to surprise information_technology target.
On Monday, it remained indecipherable what menstruation is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistent suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the meter of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling divvy_up they do non have in the hope of bribe them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock change authorities on both sides of the impart to investigate volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another illustration was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the companionship had signed a debt rescheduling agreement commit the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that time denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into the trade activity and erroneous reports surrounding its shares and the incidental might well be the focus of the French probe.