From antediluvian ages, humans have used symbols and myths to express their experience of a reality that transcends the forcible world and impart it to future generations. Nowadays, celebrated brands apply mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the house of Versace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained wherefore he chose this character; it is a synthesis of smasher and simplicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, merely like the clothes produced by the brand. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the production of tractors. The bull became the emblem of the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this animal is extremely audacious and strong, which endows the brand with bang-up power. Now, Lamborghini cars constitute high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden bull is very allow for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because immorality ne'er prevails, and good and justice win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Mount_Olympus to provide it for humankind. He make humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus educate people to write, count, crafts and introduced them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to build ships; humans became proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroy people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decided to penalize him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rainfall was pound him. However, this was not the end of the titan’s torment; vitamin_A giant eagle sat on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the bird_of_Jove that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.