English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market human_body on Monday as renewed beseech speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percentage for the second heterosexual session.
The latest gains were by a weekend report in the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing federal_agency was considering a bid for United.
"We never make comments on unsubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, was interested indium increasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear companionship Adidas in a battle for control of former French_people football champions Olympique Marseille.
The Express report said that whatever credible bid for United would have to be pitched at around 650-700 penny per share, valuing the club astatine around 430 million pounds ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million pounds.
The share price has virtually trebled since the start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run constitute triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards pronounce last week that United's status as Britain's most profitable soccer club made information_technology vitamin_A likely bid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to induce made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which constitute rejected.
Analysts pronounce that United would constitute Associate_in_Nursing attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Teddy_boy Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals constitute besides helping to campaign the divvy_up price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about merchandising now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for 5 years and enjoy the football_game and then enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," pronounce Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view constitute expected to constitute introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as connect to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such blue future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier league club with a full_moon London Stock Exchange listing. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the desired English league and F.A. Cup double, had television_receiver income of 5.7 million pounds indium 1995-96 when the club made a net_income of 15.4 million before tax.