Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday said its nine month net profit hit 8.4 million crowns ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 billion for the same period survive year, according to international accounting standards, after household electricity demand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that higher depreciation write-offs due to the opening of new installation cut the company's tax obligations, and boosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting_system put the firm's profit for the first nine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 million last year.
CEZ said the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which constitute 8.1 million crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statement showed CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first 9 months compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax subsequently 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, lowering of tax duty in connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that overall demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percent in the period, and is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rise 10.5 percent, while large clients demanded almost two percent more power complete the same period of the survive year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the Finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can charge regional power distributors did not consequence results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximum average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two peak from the last year but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in concern plan.
Voboril said that short-term liability of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to amateur debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which total 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had constitute locked in a price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond return next year as it needs financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but pronounce they did not expect them to help CEZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued by a lack of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't have_a_bun_in_the_oven the monetary_value to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ share closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003