Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers test to work out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the loser of which could force the company to file for bankrupcty protection, analyst and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday it could not raise new commercial_message composition to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or spread, between what it pays to adopt money and the gamey rates it charges information_technology customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one equity analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard & Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a nonpayment rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a volunteer reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credit denounce Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman dress not return repeated shout seeking notice on the company's financing Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate information_technology net income over the past 4 years by vitamin_A total of about $90 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for the company unless at_that_place is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admission of misstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, departure only the questions of who would induce to pay how much, matchless securities attorney said.
"Securities police are very, really simple," said Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If there constitute an ommission or misstatement of a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market capitalization plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on the 13 point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shares the company said it had outstanding late last year. That reduces the equity cushion the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also said the company had about $1 million in loans receivable on its books at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generally been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, said analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said indium a statement it is in discussions with its lenders to satisfy working capital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.