Bre-X Minerals Ltd. induce been silent since it said last calendar_month that it formed a partnership with the Son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, a move that has disquieted shareholders and prompted regulators to try more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent questions that have sent the Canadian mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X induce conserve a chase silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Republic_of_Indonesia has not talked to the press for weeks. Company officials will take shout only from a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of immediately addressing questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic Review particularization its links with Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not return essential contracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an possession dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute induce put a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the ample Busang aureate deposit in east Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's Son represent expected to help the company clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they buttocks get everything within a couple of weeks," pronounce gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, World_Health_Organization said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he pronounce Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for general interest purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were necessitate its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other exploration companies in Asia have complained the doubt has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and affirm the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."