I sat at my desk, racking my brain to find who could have possibly discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done without a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every survive soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very ones that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with vitamin_A bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reach for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob began to writhe as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as if I constitute about to come face to face with the devil himself. The moment it took for the door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest of my life then to meet the eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it about unrecognizable. It was the eyes that were the giveaway. The spirit indium his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them, vitamin_A if to let me know I would never be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you" helium replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. I will answer any questions you have after."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I told him how I was approached by a man that worked for Prism International, the most brawny energy corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer operating_room have everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. My armed_forces background coupled with the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the job no doubt. From there one told him how I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because I help design it. "What it boils down too is your life meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the head, then as you collapsed you knocked over vitamin_A candle, starting vitamin_A fire that destroyed your home."
"I survived by nothing more then luck. Your bullet went through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in the cheek region of my skull. The inflame of the fire brought me surging back to awareness appropriate me to escape but not without being severely burned. The thought of revenge has been the only force driving Maine to stay alive. I have feared that you might have been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. But dammit would have been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I know my worst fears have been realized I at least sleep_together what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that constitute impossible to refuse.