Learning history helps people draw connections between the past and present and allows making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest and research. No matter how well societies develop in price of technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of the most devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousand of people in many countries.
My anterior knowledge of the topic is not ample, but I do know that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the Soviet_Union kept the explosion a secret, which prevented people from saving their lives within the first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunately, individuals living adjacent to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The stroke lead to the increase in radiation levels to “between ten and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I have also read about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more about the reasons that led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was preventable. Also, I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the truth and not let people salvage their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens constitute constitute gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am refer that such calamity buttocks occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act so thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always see freedom and health as the most important values. I believe that world leaders should do everything potential to prevent such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is that people should learn from such disasters and usage this devastating lesson in the future. However, my position is very closely associate to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukrayina are alarming. In the context of my topic, I should note that a few day ago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to gain what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not teach some people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that countries of the human_race had learned the measure of people’s health and lives. That is why one want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able to learn more about that calamity and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the possibility of its repetition.