British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN along Tuesday posted lower interim profits vitamin_A income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley besides told Reuters that the planned second weekly National lottery absorb would be launched on February five and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has confront vitamin_A storm of unfavorable_judgment over its jackpot earnings since the lottery was launched two years ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 billion pounds and gross_sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same menstruation a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of ten million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, Associate_in_Nursing event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executives said that the descent in scratchcard sales was to be have_a_bun_in_the_oven as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of blink_of_an_eye have fallen since their launch and are now reconcile at approximately 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the second weekly absorb should promote sales of National Lottery game tag by 15-20 percentage from their current hebdomadally average of 69 million.
Camelot pronounce that over one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had constitute handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tax constitute just chthonian one percent of tot sales and Holley dismissed criticism of Camelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this state with success," he said, total that foreign drawing companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot initiation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.