NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who currently runs its American operations, would take over as chief operating officer of the investing bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen.
At the same time, NatWest Markets said it would streamline initiation and distribution functions into one Global Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would result from the consolidation.
The bank has been on the acquisition trail recently, bribe corporate finance boutique J O Hambro Magan indium October, disbursement $590 million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 million pounds on Gartmore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specializer Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have expressed concern that NatWest will find it hard to bring these wholly together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to compliment each other.
Some feel that NatWest is disbursement large total of cash on bribe businesses that could be about the top of their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets business is full-bodied and it can make returns while it constitute still building," pronounce one analyst. "But vitamin_A revenue downturn will tend to hit the players who are building rather than those who are already established."
Currently, investment banks are enjoying by_and_large the low-inflation, steady growth conditions seen in many major economies with an accompanying healthy amount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But vitamin_A substantial downturn on Wall Street, predicted by many strategists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions counting a little less appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said the debauched growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should be distinguish from strategy, client development and fiscal supervision.
"As President and COO, Peter will be charged with implementing our operational plan, leaving me More time to work with global product heads to shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were happy that NatWest had brought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes it perplex difficult to keep continuity and matter can start to fall apart," said one analyst. "I would classify this appointment as continuity, so that's good."