Lear Corp., furthering its request to supply complete car interiors, said Fri it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB.
Lear said it signed a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, outside trim and various other components for the European car and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of approximately $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ approximately 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the concern include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports its strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels.
"Not only does this acquisition beef_up sexual_intercourse with our European customers, merely it positions Edward_Lear as the lone independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capability indium all five interior arrangement -- broadening the solicitation of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear president Kenneth Way said in a statement.
The deal constitute the latest of vitamin_A series of consolidation moves indium the automotive interior market. Lear earlier this twelvemonth purchased rug and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last year bought door panel and comfort maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive Department_of_the_Interior components.
The company's stock was unchanged Friday at $38 a share on the New House_of_York Stock Exchange.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson see Inc., which has a strong seating business, recently assume Department_of_the_Interior parts maker prince Automotive, establish indium Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion in cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., one of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired buttocks maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.