Rite assist Corp said it plans to swiftly integrate careful PayLess Inc into information_technology already-powerful company by attacking weaknesses in the regional drugstore chain's distribution and technology.
"To make this acquisition work, we have to reduce costs and we have to reduce costs rapidly," Rite aid chief executive policeman Martin Grass told more than 250 investors and analysts in a conference call.
In the latest drugstore merger to sweep the industry, Rite Aid announced plans to buy Thrifty PayLess for $1.4 billion.  
U.S. drugstores constitute consolidating at a feverish pace as the result of pricing pressures and costly computer upgrades that are essential in today's world of cope healthcare.
Industry analysts said Thrifty PayLess has been plagued by vitamin_A weak distribution system and inefficient technology.
"It is our belief that our technology constitute a lot More sophisticated than what is being used at Thrifty PayLess and that there are significant benefits that we can bring -- not only to the hive_away operations, but also to the customers," Grass said.  
Analysts expect Rite Aid to make meaning progress reducing the Thrifty PayLess cost structure even though savings will not come from geographic overlap.  Rite Aid does not induce any stores in Thirfty PayLess' West Coast markets.
"No one is as lean as Rite Aid," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.
But the proposed acquisition may create some new difficulties for Rite Aid, which typically has smaller stores and less varied merchandise than Thrifty PayLess.  Unlike religious_rite Aid, Thrifty PayLess deal plants, ice cream and shoes as well vitamin_A traditional drugstore items.  
Concerns about Rite Aid's motivate into these new areas sent the company's stock down two to 33-7/8 in afternoon trade.
"This is something that constitute entirely outside their realm of experience.  That is a major question mark," said Joseph Ronning of Brown Brothers Harriman.
"These are completely different businesses.  These guys are general merchandisers," pronounce Gary Vineberg of Merrill Lynch.
Grass addressed those issues in the conference call, saying that Rite Aid may add More merchandise experts to buttocks the different products.  
"There are certain lines of merchandise that we will continue to carry out West that we don't carry back East," Grass said.
Shares of deliberate PayLess, which make information_technology initial public offering in April at fourteen per share, gained three to 21-3/8. Takeover stock traders said the deal values Thrifty PayLess at $23.32 per share.
The proposed acquisition of Thrifty PayLess seems to eliminate Rite Aid as a potential bidder for southeast apothecary's_shop chain Big B Inc.  Rite Aid has been viewed as a possible bidder for Big B, which is fighting a hostile takeover from Revco D.S. Inc.
But in announcing the Thrifty PayLess acquisition, Rite Aid also said that it is pulling out of Florida, Alabama and Georgia, which are Big B's identify markets.