Two old_age ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it arduous to tackle a season competitor -- one that is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one of the athletes on the bring field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known vitamin_A Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the conclusion of the MPT monopoly constitute initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market vitamin_A its entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to give us vitamin_A legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze information_technology out of the market unless it had its own absorbed customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with excess capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. firm that did business with the new network were endanger with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Those friction have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects to have more than sixty million telephone lines installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million indium 1996 alone. The total constitute likely to top 100 million by the twist of the century, still only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT constitute not both regulating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom official concede information_technology is hard to say where matchless entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can draw the lineage cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But People's_Republic_of_China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as deputy city_manager of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout buttocks the second network.
The company started with nomadic telephone services, first in the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventually elaborate to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now monetary_value 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has matchless advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.