Light rains in Ivory Coast later a dry start to January will help mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, peculiarly if they extend into February, a crop psychoanalyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January so far but a fiddling more now and in February would help," another local crop psychoanalyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rain was patchy.
Most fell in central and northern chocolate and coffee areas, particularly approximately Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now over central areas," said matchless weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for the period but southern areas are in deficit," helium added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rain seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light exhibitor in most cocoa areas," said the crop psychoanalyst after retort from an up-country tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions from the Sahara had now retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory seashore as usually expected in late-December or early January.
Exporters and crop inspectors said cocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of 8 percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee farmer have besides had drying problems but export activity remained low after shipments put by port sources at 10,492 metric_ton for Oct to December, exporters said.
Quality inspectors said a adept picture of coffee humidity and quality subsequently rains would issue as arrivals picked up.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the watch rainfall for the second 10 days of January in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and world 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.