The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in  prison has sparkedconcerns among Hong Kong's pro-democracy activists. Many fear that this move may be an indication of the Chinese government's increasingefforts to curb freedoms in HongKong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent activist and former editor at the banned Chinese newspaper, the Southern Weekly, was convicted of "subverting state power." This charge is often used against critics of the Chinese government who push for greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong activists spoke out against what they see asa flagrant violation of basic human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democrac y activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong is increasingly brazen… officials are now going after mainland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, was quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case was dealt with by the mainland authorities according to the law of the mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administrat ive Region government would not interfere  with the judicial proceedings of thecentral authorities."
Regardless of the government's stance, many remain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue that Hong  Kong's freedoms have beensteadilyeroded in recent years, with the government taking an increasingly hardline stance agai nst dissent.
This sentiment was echoed in a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted "grave concern" over the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kong's legal system and the erasure of the city's auton omy.
The report called on the US government to consider actions to help protec t Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also comes less than a year after China imposed a controversial national securitylaw  on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and gives the Chinese government new powers to police Hong Kong's political system.
These developments are seen by many as a major blow to Hong Kong'sautonomy, which was promised when the city was handed over from Briti sh to Chinese rule in 1997. With growing concern over the erosion of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists arecalling on the international community to speak out and take action to protect the city's democratic system.