The modern world is currentlyfacing a significant change under globalization trends that shape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and even everyday behavior. Most importantly, dueto the active exchange of information between people worldwide, culture is changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture will be further homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper will argue that culture will become m ore diverse under the influence of globalizationdue to the introduction of multiple cultural elementsinto societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate that both sides of the argume nt, namely those supporting diversification and the ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized society where a dominant c ulture prevails, diversity will be substituted with the culture that is imposed on others through such means as cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes around the world because the US cinema market is the largest in the world. Thus, gl obalization allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, int egrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the o ther side of the argument is more compelling because it considers the strengths of local cultures. In particular, an example of sushi’s popularity in Amer ican society and cultures of other nations demonstrates that people adopt new cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of their origin. According to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains theworld’s  primary market for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, having integrated its product into the cultures of other countries, Japan has expanded its market share.
In such a manner, with the eas e of transportation and communication enabled by globalization, there is a  merge of cultures around the world. However, since market forces commonly rule   these processes, the host cultures are aware of the origins of the borrowed culturalclusters. Therefore, to summarize thediscussion, one might state that culture will not be homogenized in globalization but rather diversified with credit given to eachcultural component.