The social determinants of health are the  conditions in the environment in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the social environment in wh ich people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors or access to quality health care (Centers for Disease Controland Prevention, n.d.). Resources  that improve the quality of life can significantly impact the health of a population.
Examples of these resources inclu de safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, n.d.). I also support the recent shift in the view thatit is solely upto the individual to influence their health in favor of recognizing the significant impact of external influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the individual. Atfirst glance, he cancho ose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care in a timely manner.
In fact, most ofthe choices that affect health are made by the marketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive to a healthy life style. The need to work hard to earn money for these products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedul e and exercise. This chain has many links, but the result isalways the same: people’s health is l argely not up to them. External factors a lso indirectly affect health, such as health inequalities.When I read the CDC (2022)  report on these inequalities, I was most surprised by the racial and ethni c inequalities. In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicate d. The field of health care is one in which treating people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I believe that racial and ethnic discrimination in this area must be eradicated in the first place.