"You really promise? Really *really* promise?"
"Of coarse I promise! Look, I've got the fiver now in my pocket."
Henry fishes a crumpled £5 note out of his back pocket. In Bill's own han ds the pige on struggles and squawks.
The group had seen the nest in the corner of the roof and immediately their thoughts turned to throwing eggs atcars and windows. How disappointed they were when, upon inspection, they found not eggs but a full grown pigeon sitting in the nest. Not to be put off James turned to Bill and dared him to catch the bird. He accepted and slowly crept closer to the nest, pausing to wave away Henry who had decided to try as well. After taking a moment to colle ct himself he leaped for the pigeon, not scared in the least of the 20 story dropjust inches away,  therewas no safety barrier. Sure enoughhe caught the pigeon. But then came the question: *What do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who supplied the dare.
"Tie your stone to it and I'll give youa fiver."
Of coarse, they have all been taught better than this. As young as theywere they had all been told at one point or another not to do anything so reckless with a stone. They were at all times to be kept hidden and safe. Never theless, Bill was keen to earn the respect of his friends and, handing the pigeon  to Henry, went jogging downstairs to fetch his stone.
Henry's stone wasn't actually a rock, none of them were nowadays, that's just what people call them. His was a ring bought especially for the purpose. This was a popular approach to stones but realistically they could be anything,you could bind your soul to a balloon if you wanted.
Presently Bill returned with his stone and after a few minutes had  it tied to the birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" He shoots a grin at James and releases the  pigeon with a jump. It squawks and begins to fly towards the neighbouring apartment block.
Bill takes his promised money from the devious friend and starts running in the opposite direction, towards the edge of the roof. Henry and James are giggling now, excited for whats going to happen next. Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the hard concrete floor. Of coarse the fall  is lethal. From the top of the building the other two can faintly hear the sound of him landing. They're out right laughing at this point, Henry is trying to use his phone to get a video.
Reincarnation only tak es a few seconds and soon enough Bill is falling again, this time watching the pigeon carry on it's flight, getting smaller and smaller until his life ends once again. Before it can land Bill appears once more in front of it, this time reaching for the rings stuck to its leg. This scare s the bird and it turns from the tower blocks and heads away from the centre of town. It's flight takes it to areas withever smaller buildings and it shows no sign of wanting to land or descend at all. And as it goes it carries Bill away with it. Henry and James stop laughing at this point, cons idering if this is why they were told to be sensible with reincarnation stones.