The Victorians believed that the virtues of society were fixed and that one can be judged according to his behavior.
The Victorians practiced good morals and behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literature, each era had a different theme according to the way we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018). Modern literature focused on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American.
The Victorian era and modern American have the same values.
The Victorian and modern American eras have impacted changes to human life. For example, in England, the rate of indictable offences reduced by 50% and the population grew from 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life. In the two eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed to current technological advancements.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same.
During the Victorian era, people were able to learn their roles and interact with each other.