Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The stock of the San Jose, Calif.-based company gained after it was announced that it would pull out of the modem-chip business and focus on the market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose in late trading.
The company will be a much smaller company now, but it will be a more profitable business, according to an analyst.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has announced plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Soundview Financial Group's Scott Randall said the modem-chip business would be difficult to sell.
"Once you announce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall asked.
Even though the company is expected to shrink to less than half of its current size in sales, other analysts were more bullish.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has been battered by falling prices and concern about slowing demand.