I opened the door and let my two gooey one eyed companions in. I knew I could not cook, but I did not sweat it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. They were mine now. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. I swung. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. I laughed at them. That was quite funny, considering what I really had planned. Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, then slept. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs were. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. On their ninth week they realized what I was doing, but they were powerless. By the next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last long, considering how attached to the food they were. Now they can't complain, so all was wondrous again. I broke their jaws, their life, their will. Two years just flew by, my little companions were so entertaining. They were now truly mine. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved them. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I then sawed off each of their four legs. But the little trick was starting to get old. Then, I told them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. The winner would eat. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. I then let them at each other. But that made it all the more worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew I needed more. He was shocked. So then, I spiced things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that in order to get his meal he would have to kill his best alien friend. He died shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining. I laughed again. I handed the syringe filled with black licorice to the victorious alien. The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. So, I prepared the murder for him slowly. It was not polite enough. So I kicked him in the gut. I threw him against the wall and told him to be polite. He demanded his jelly beans. The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. HE COULD NOT PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. His attitude was simply unacceptable. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR. But I would not miss it. Boy did I love that experience. It was a lot of work. Alien flesh tasted so good. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Even though I could not cook well, I knew not to sweat it from the beginning. My plan had been a great success after all. I knew it was all worth it. r/jesuschristreddit What do you think about it? Did I write it correctly BookWyrm17? I think I did it pretty well!