"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at being called roaches." The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. Sometimes, either one of us would need to raise our voices to be heard. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Clay?" "Why is that, Mr. When the light comes on, we run." "See, we got one thing in common with those dirty sons of bitches. I sipped my coffee. "Yet earlier, you said you're different." "I don't think my opinion—"
"Answer the damned question." "Tell me, do you trust the government?" Nolan shrugged. "Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Even as a journalist, I don't always get to—"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your sins be washed away, as long as you committed them in this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white house?" Far as I know, only one fella can pardon you. "Was brought up Christian, you know. I scoffed. Humans ain't so forgiving or forgetful." "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty-six people came forward with confessions." Nolan's expression became thoughtful. Eighty murders in total, along with a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate six of her neighbors' cats. "I saw the newspapers. Hilarious." "Really? I laughed. I don't see what's funny about that." "The cats? I'm talking about the math. There are several times that number of homicides alone in New York City, let alone the state or the country. Who cares about the cats? Eighty murders? Criminals don't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?" Doesn't that prove what I've been saying? Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. "More than half." Why, then, are you keen on publicity?" "You're making me blush. I don't know what you're talking about." You murdered seven people. "Eight, actually. "1978. Or so you confessed." Nolan blanched, but turned a page on his notebook. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying." I shrugged. A shooting in Central Park. "1996. Fifteen dead, including two police officers." "I wanted to clear the air. Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. The Russian mob was making their move; I was only defending myself. But that's nothing compared to the bus bomb bank robbery in December." I leaned forward and motioned for him to come closer. "Released two years later when the government decided to pardon that year." "I understand you were arrested for that." His eyes gained a hungry look. "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The real reason behind these pardons?" "Yes, you can write this down." You know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, on Americans by Americans. "I think the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. Why else would they pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?" Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously. Respect. "Besides, when you confess, you get a reputation. Smirking, I leaned back. No, not from local shrimps. The big players. 2001 was a pretty great year for me. "Off the record, please." Sold a lot of intel to foreign players." I believe you wrote the article. "You didn't confess that," Nolan said. "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of course. I drained my cup of coffee and looked at my watch. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the century'." "Man, those banks and financial institutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Twenty billion. Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. That's what they get for underestimating Chinese tech." Nolan nodded and flipped a page. "Let's move to the big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me the scoop?" I grinned. Fourteen train carriages. The Vietnamese ambassador. "How about a riddle? You a journalist, do some research. Can't be giving you everything, right? Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre." Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I have some reading to do." Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow." "Sure you do. We stood and shook hands. As I turned to leave, a young man whose face was full of piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?" There was screaming, and a lot of people running, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. I nodded. "There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly. He pushed a gun into my chest and opened fire. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched beside me. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the same end. You're a big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogant for your own good. "And guess what?" Just because the government wouldn't touch you, doesn't mean we won't." "Next year, when the government decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't even hold this against me." He took the gun from the young man's hand and held it against my temple. Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! ***
*Thanks for reading! *