8% of the residents of progressive countries have chronic pain, which is considered to be an extreme issue.
There is no information about the effects of opiate drugs.
The data was collected and analyzed in the form of a study.
The most revealing and inclusive type of study is the one that contains direct responses from a large number of participants.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias, especially regarding people in severe pain and unstable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exaggerate their depressive state or vice versa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. Because the survey responses were thoroughly anonymous, the researchers were unable to carefully analyze each patient’s reaction and compare it to the actual states of condition. More accurate answers could be obtained by professional psychologists via personal communication and behavioral analysis. However, this method of research is way more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Participants were recruited for six months at two major pain relief centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic pain for at least 3 months. The study included 890 participants, of which 474 (59%) were treated solely with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated with MM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et al., 2017). The remaining ten participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana were withdrawn from the analysis in the research. Therefore, it is not possible to comprehensively compare patients taking medications with those who do not.
The study conducted a correlation type of research with variable measures. It evaluated the interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio of female patients was remarkably higher in the opiates group compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major depressive disorders.
The variables used to collect information were gender, age, country, type of residence, and years of education.
Among all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from depression, and 37% experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%, respectively. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, 21.5% among MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who took strong opiates were tended to place their pain on a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively to almost all survey questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed medications course had a significantly more stable emotional state and coped with pain more manageable.
One of the major limitations is the insufficiently high response rate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained by the weak focus of respondents who have overcome severe pain sensations and depressive episodes. It is not clear how to use these statistics, as they still may be relevant for the overall analysis.