Home use of the Internet's World Wide Web has more than doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent of U.S. households claiming to have used the Web in the last month, according to a study by PC-Meter.
11 percent of the 98.7 million US households were equivalent to about 11 million homes, up from 4% a year ago, according to the market research company.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to have used some type of Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home Web users now visit shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
The highest percentage of users were men.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, clubs that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the holiday season upon us, the greatest growth to date at these sites may well occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site, followed by Columbia House Co., which sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks.
Columbia House and ZD Net are both popular consumer shopping sites.
Amazon.com is a cyber-book store with more than 1 million titles to choose from.
Coming in as the 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the category in minutes of usage per month, averaging 41.99 minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter said its results on home Internet use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on a quarterly basis. Its audience rating report is done monthly.
PC-Meter is a subsidiary of the NPD Group, which is based in Port Washington, N.Y.