These days never get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's when I get to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me.
It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed with flames down the side.
I don't want to take too much credit since I have never met the kid, but I think he turned out alright since he gets good rest at night.
The lights go out, but everything is okay.
To which the boy would say "But dad I know he's in here".
The dad said that he knew we shouldn't have allowed him to watch the movies with his mom.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"Father, I can handle anything!"
"Okay bud, sleep well, remember it's just like any other night," the dad said as he turned out the lights.
Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this kid hears the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. Not that I get much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's not your ordinary town with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor's world knows my world even exists. Sure, everyone around seems to get along, but at night the real creeps come out. These guys like to cause problems and they can do that to each other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an extra rush that boils my blood and I step in.
They don't call the kids kids, they call them dessert, and they're assigned a "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay.
If only Taylor knew what fighting these bastards was like. You've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the length of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my size. Don't want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite. It's always the small ones that give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast. If I wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that means the creeps win and they would have their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nights work.
I love my job, I really do, but hearing Taylor laugh is what keeps me going.