China's rubber stamp parliament failed to pass an anti-corruption bill on Monday after fierce debate over whether it should specifically target government officials.
State media had reported heated discussion at the week-long session of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that closed on Monday.
There were disagreements among China's usually tame lawmakers about the scope of the death penalty and whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The law on administrative supervision was due to be voted on this week.
The law was withdrawn "because legislators sharply disagreed with the name of the law", it said, quoting parliament chairman Qiao Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill should be named the Law On Administrative Supervision in line with its regulation of the government.
Legislators argued that the Law on Supervision should be called simply the Law on Supervision, without reference to the administration.
The issue should be put forward for a vote at the next standing committee session.
Beijing has launched repeated crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcement of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, state media said.
The designation of managers of state firms as government employees who are subject to a maximum penalty of death for corruption was one source of contention.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Managers of non-state firms face a maximum of only 15 years in jail for corruption.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption
The failure of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign -- for dereliction of duty.
Under the law, prosecutors would have the powers to investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freeze bank accounts of those suspected of graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent, the media said.
Corruption was virtually wiped out in the years after the communists took over in 1949 but has staged a comeback after economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.