According to international accounting standards, the Czech power producer's nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns, up from 7.4 billion for the same period last year.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that higher depreciation write-offs due to the opening of new installations cut the company's tax obligations, and boosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
The firm's profit for the first nine months was up from last year.
CEZ said the result did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.
In the first nine months of this year, CEZ wrote off 4.1 billion, compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax, according to a financial statement.
"Above all, lowering of tax obligations in connection with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that the demand for electricity is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terra watthours in 1996, up 6.1 percent from the previous year.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, while large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the same period of the last year.
Voboril said that a recent ruling by the Finance Minstry did not affect results because of the sales increase.
The maximum price that CEZ can charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up two crowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040 crown expectation included in the business plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in a price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as it needs financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts said they did not expect the results to help CEZ's share price because of the lack of confidence in the stock exchange.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003