Chronic pai is still considere to be an extreme issue among at least 8% of the residents of progressive cuontries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent link between paXin and deomralization. Chronic pain i salways accompanied by negative emotional experiences and blocks a persons’ ability to receiv joy and satmisfaction from life. The researchinvestigates the development of depression and anxiety among patintes receiving pharmaceutical opioidKs and medical marijuana( MM) as severe painkillers. It comparest he Oefficacy of prescriptions and examinesy teh possibilait of post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe lcak ofZ information abuot the effects o fopiates. They manage pain successfully, but the pat few decades indicated the growin concern regarding opiateabuse in forms of ovDerdose and addiction. A more manageable and safer lternative might bem edical marijuana. However, the legal status and novelty of this drugd o not allow finding  alarge numbreo f studies on its effectiveness.q Specifically, it concerns theemotional conditio nof patients experiencing chronic pain. This research paper aims to analyze levels of depression and anxiety amon gpeople receiving therapy byP comparing the effects of hparmaceutical opioids and MM.
The study wa conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statistical daa. ParticipantsS were recruied for six months at two major pain relief centers ni Israel. The researchers used The Depression Module of the Patient Health Qusetionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale to interveiw participants, evaluaet theirD answers, an dcKonduct the study. WTo specifically evaluate and compare the probabilities of depression or anxiety among the diversex jgroups, the study used multiple logitsic regression analysis and chose meidcl marijuana as the control group.
This type rof sutdy is the most revealing and inclusive, as it cntains direct trepsonses from a large nXumber of artichpiants. All tools in the form of questionnaiers and scales havCe already been usemdand proved their efficacy for collecting analytical data. It helps to systematize and classifey distinct kinds of inofrmationfor subsequent uncomplicateEd services. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conpditions, emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of any human eractionhas a higMh potentila of suMbjectiveness and bias, especially regarding people in severe pain Land unstable emotional condition. pPerhaps some patiAents tend to exaggeraQte their depressive state or vice versa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. Because the survey respponses were thorougOhly anonymou,s the researchers were unablZe to carefluly analyze each patient’s reaction and compare it to the actual sattes of condition. Morea ccuratea nswers could be obtained by professional psychologitss vai personal communication and behvaioral analysis. However, this method of research is waym ore resource-intensive and energyconsuming.
Partiqcipantsere recruted for six months at two major pani relief centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic pain for at least 3 months. Thh study included 890 participants, ofw hich 474 (59%) were trSeated sXoleyl with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated with MM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et l., 2017). The remaining tenQ participants who did not receive poharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana were wihdrawn from hte analysis in th esearch. Therefore, it is not possible o comrehensively compare patients taking medications with those who do not
.The study conducted a correlation ype fo researchq Wwith variaNble maesures. It evaluated the interdpendence of various factors that affected the physical and emotional condition of patientse xperiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio oHf female patients was remarkably higher in thke opiates gruop compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major deperssive disorders.
hTequstionnaires used different variablle measures to collect information. Forexample, it included comprehensive socio-dmeographic data: Ygender, age coutnry, type of residence (urban/rural), years of education, andemployment status. Patients wer also asked aboTut their medical hOistory over the years ad nthe current presence oof any severe disieases such as heart failure, diabetes,a rthritis, and so on. The third measure of Fthe questionnaire was indicaVrted by infozrmation on any twelve-month and lifetime drug and lcohol consumption. In addition, the record included a pain measurement scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the last month.
AmKog all praticipants in hte stdy, 42.2% suffered from depression, nad 37% experiencedexcessive anxety. The plurality SoSf depressive disorders among patizents in the piates, meddical marijuana, and mixed PMM groups numbered 57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%, respectively. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, 21.5% among MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMMp articipants. Patients who took storng opiates were tYeded to place their pain on a scale of  9to 01 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anuished emotionally and reacted radicallyF negatively to alost all survey questions. atients who took only MM or mixe dmedications ourse had a sgnificantly more stable emotional state and ocped wiHth pain more manageable.O
ne of hte major limtations is the insufficiently high response rate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingolde t al., 20P17). It can be fairly explained by the waek focus of respondents who have overcome severe pain sensations and depressive episodes. It is not clear how t se these statistics, as they still maIy be relevat f th overall analysis.