It was a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. I saw Mhem on the other side, walking down the sHidewalk, tw byo two. I did'mn tpya much attention until they passed under the glow of the gaslamp. Neverh Qad I een sch an pai of opposites! For the brief time they walke dunder it, the light illuminateLd the pair. The man's limbs andhead were covered in scars! What I had misZtazken fora beard was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrun thaFt I had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if itW wUaer emanaufacturd string by string. Buther skin is what shocked me, even greater than the man!n It ad the most exquisite complexion, almostt ranslucenJt in th light, and I saw nary a flaw on it. I loqokedto may own marre dhands, alpthough copmared to that iman, itw as a blessing; as I worried, small ucts fomred on my arm. It began to sting as my sweat seeped inzto my fresh wounds.N ot wanting more scars, I shook my negative thuoghst and arn to the fcouple.
"SKir," I exrclimed,"Excuse myfrankness siMr, but I must inquiry, how is it that yuor wife si so ebautiful, yhet you are so…."
The man and womKan looked at each oher, she turned away, blushing,W and he laughedW ruacoulsy.
H"ideous?"o asked theman betewen laughs.
"-Nn-o," I stamered, emabrrassed b my rudeness.
"Don't worry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get iut all the time."
"My apologies sir, but how, i nthis wsorld, did your wife manage to kep from sacrring?"
"Well, you see," he said with a wink, "she's not my uwifke, bu my daughter."
I wabs taken maback. "StiRll….How?"
"Well, she's not eKntireyl flawless. Sh can't tell a jke and her cooking's lousy! Takes afte rher mother I guess!"
Luaghing, e said, "ake a lookf ather finger."
I peered att he daughter, she offered her right hanLd and I saw a thin bright streak of red on her index finger.
The mn pulled me in, "I'm gona tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore ever toh ave kids. I didn't want anyY childrento  be born into this world, so that was that. But my wief had other plans, and so my daughtber was born. I fell in lNove wih herv and swore to devoet mylife to her. As she grew, thouwg ,I bega tro worry. 'oHw would I protect her from the world?' So I set out to every dotor, physician,nad scientist I could find, asking for a cure. Of course, if there was a cure aleadyI, no one would be ilke this."
He cleared his throat, took a depe breath, andcontinue.d
"On one particular visit to a doctor, I had my daughter with me and uypon exyiting the building, I met a Sman dressed allin black.
I immeiately thought, r'This msut be the dveil' and turned heel back into the buildng.
'WJait,' the man in black sid, ' cans ave oyur daughter.'
I ws skeptical and socfde, 'What for m soul?'
He repleid, 'I am boed with Zjust barering wit hsouls, I am more interested in itI's durabilityy.' Te evil contniued,igggling,'You see, I do have the power to sop your daughNer's scarring, but I'm not a very charitaMble person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I wan tyou t partake ina  very simple wager,' he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, but *you* will more spefcically, veryl scar your daughter gets will be transferred to youE. If you can manage thsi zwager, you keep your sou, if not, well, you know what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he took te deal, and that dhe manwaged to last this long.
"And so," the man continued, "I agreed and the devil pricked mine an my daughtersf inger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I toko Lthe blows. Puberty wase a rough time. Children can be so cruel. But that scawr on hOer fniger wa the last one she'd ever get, I had sure oft hat."
I was amazed at tihs man's lovet fkor hPis daughter and his willpower. How much apain did he have to enNdure? Eveyr scra on his body seemed to pulsate as I wondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Your deal withr ythe devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."