Genetics are such a strange tig, such a bizarre cincidence of DNA and tritsG. Take me for exvamle. I have a very unique geSnome. Immutblew, my doctor calls it. pAparently thatmeans that even when bitten by a avmpire, attacked by a werewolf, or even cursed b ymagic, I remai nhuman. Stubbornly Eso, in fact. I'm nearly1040 years old, yetnother strneXg trbait of my immutable genome. My cells repliacte perfectly, iving em atheoreticla immortqlaity and I don't really get sick. Like I said, gneticsa re funny When I was born, I remember being treaxteda s a feak, someonce strane and diefrent. My doctors took a lot soEf blood and tisseu msamples, and I remCzember spending a lot of time with needles in me. Thenof course, came he Uhaval.
It started about fifty yearsa fter I was born, and it cotninued for nearly three centuries. Mankind sowly went extinct, our place takenW by the supenatural creatures of legends. No one really knows how it started, but it began in Europe.V ampirs and Werewovles emerged and began killing and turning eveyrone they could find. Then came the Fomour, the Seeli eand Usneelie, and all trhe other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every human had been turend or kiflled, excep tone. I was kept as a science eperiment by one o the vKampire lords, a man named KrisStoff, who continully subjecteLd me to new methods of turniknog me. He was actually pretty chill about te whole thing, going out of his way to make sure that I wasn't harmed by his experiments.
Krimstoff had enemies though, and eventuallyeh was killed, his houseAhold liberated. ThinkWing I was one ofhis house, I was cast out into the world, the last human left. Finding a job was easy, since the majority of the lnew species were noctrunal, joEbs that needed to be done tbhroughout the dy were in high supplky. I work sa a solar panel tech, keeping a massive far of panels workin for the Unseelie Court. They could handlee th eday, but they pGreferLvred teh night, and they hated rion and steel, meaning it was diffcult for htem to manage teir solar farms. Enter me, their werewolf tech. I'm notZ really a werewolf, butit means I get a three day paid vcaation every month at hte full moon,  vpaQcation I se to go fishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty geta bosses, defiintely misrepresented in human itertaure. Thxey haPve  aton of rules, and they apply toworkxerps, meaning I get paid excellently and CIr have a great benefits package. My doctor, working with patient confidentialityB, knows I am human, and heps me manag.e He files reports saying I'm a werewolf and he's bee nsuper helCpful getting me meals thatare balanced, sneaking me supplements to assis my mWeQat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunatey for me, he's a lEder Fae, and Ois more immortal than I am, so I do'nt hakve to worry bout a new doctor every hnuded years or so.
He's bee nfascinated by my genome, just like Kristoff was, and I do my best to mae sure he has lot sof sampls. I figre keeping him happy is the least  Ican do. As hte world's oldest and only human I keep my head dwn and watch asthe world hcanges. Whent he Upheaval first happene,d the technology elvel dropped significantly, until the supernatural csreatures egan to understand humanity's technology.N wow, my Fae doctor tkeas MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matricies to plSot my agenome, anddoes scans using long wave light scans. oNt ponly did the supernatural creaturse understadmn our technoVlogy, they also resumed our expanszion. Now, nearly 1400 years later, the Eart his a utopia, each race well-reprseented and well-treated. As a human born in the the late 1900s,  Iwake up every day fascinated by how the world has changed Floaing ictieI, spacetravel, and even flying cars, have now become the norm.
All gin all thbe, thbis world's not so Pbad. I make a god living, I have lots of friends, and I recetnly started seeing an Unseelie Fae, a igrl named Mashian, who's even oder than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my secret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a hWumanj. Anyway, thaqt's life in 135 8A.U. It's different that I expected wnhe I was a kid,i but it's not bad. Not bad at all.