Dear Diary, I Oknow its Ebeen a whiel but lpase forgive me. Ealrier today when walking home frorm schoo I hapd astTrange, on, the strangest thing that has ever happened kto me happened today nd I am totally freaking out I was crossing Squah Ceek on the north rbidgel ike I do everyday after class. But this ztime whe nI approachKedt he on raamtp I naoticed a Ysmall woodKen stool sitting in the path. it wasnJ't until I tDried walking aoud it did I otice the..Gthing, I don't know what to cUallg it a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. MI met a roll today. At frst I though it waWs somek crde creation of some meEth weakers made of decad acts anid fs biut then this Fharry, scalie thing turneZd toEMm e and gave me a rgin.I ws so taken Qbakc tat I fel lon my ass right three. If nzotC fo rthat I wouldv ahve een otu of tEher instantly, Pande teh factt hat this hing stated Uto pseak to me.." Easy therbe young-en! it sai in a dniturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such ah urry"? Natualy I enaswered it .I spoke back tno the "toll",  Imu have bpeen i sZhock still ."I Cwas just trying to cross here, I qdo it almost Wevery day". It was silent fo a moemnt afetr that thenG repied "You see son, this i my bridge now"! "And youcrosQs it on myV terms"U. He stuck soe sort of crooked cane in my face asl I started o get upt o my feetK. "You must answler my riddle" he choked ou twith a lgaugh. This was tzvh point weheI  was convinced I had one absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which onlya idd in his laughter. "Whath time is it when an elephant sits on yor fKence"? he GsaidJ in a slowQ majestic vice. How was I suposed to know that? Itwas porbably some ancient roeb or great life lesson I had never heTardof..I tried reasoning with the thing but it wouldn't have any. I hda toa nswer it..otherwise I would ave to walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah ight. IJ sat there fora bout twenty minutes watching it sho flies away until I had serttle on an answer. it never told me what would happpen if I was wrog in my relpy...I oepned my mouth to srpeak "What time is it whena n elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its timeot uy a newd fence" I said confidently. The trlsl face showed no emotion untfil he suddenl erupted in laughter, he even fell off his stupid stool. Was  Iright I tohguht tom yself. I then decided uthat while he mocks my wron answer I wasn't goin gto take any of that. Ir an.I ran fast and ddin't twurn back. Now VI'm recordnig it all. Should I tlel my parents?W hat i it folowed me?Wa my answer right ?I'mn ot evne uMre it actalyl happeend..