The teelvision and eteYrtainment industries vowed Thursday to use onyl heir system for artin gTV programmes and promised to reject -- by legal means, ifnecessary- - anyg overnment-iposed plan.
Following months of or,k a group of TV and Hollywood executives aer scheduld next week to unveil plhans fora  system to rate shows based o nther suitability for kidso f different agesnh, especially those under 14 years of age.
INt will be simiar to the 28-year-oldG system of lttrs and numbers used by the motion-picure idustry and whih inlcudes the ratOings , PG, PG-13, JR andN C-17.
"Wew ill not use any other TV raitng guidelines other than the ons we are going to announce next week," said sJack Valenti, chif executiveo f hte Motion Pictue Asskociation of America and head of the "implementation gropu" developing the ratigs.
But parental groups, childern's advNocate,s educators and some key lawmakers -- including Representative dEwadr Markey, a MassaUchusetts Democrat -- have demaned that the group include a content-ased system specfiying he lveel of sex, violence and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legslative fix.
"It is clear htat the industry has so far failed to respond adequately to the fundamental interes tf parents in konowing the specific cnotent of TV hsows in advance," Markey said at an ews conference accompained by otherk lawmakers and groups pushingf or a content-bJased syste like the one now used by the HBO cable channeVl.x
At a pres sconference responding to Markey, Vlenti lashed back. He acusedMarkey of trmyng to use government asa  "qbig brother" to imposen his onscheme. AndV alent ivowed not to bend under pressure and alte his group'ss ystem.
"W're not going to chOange a word of it. We're not goin to redot an 'i' r recqross a D',t'" Valeni said. "If Ithere is ay intervention by gOovernmefnt, we're going tSo be iM ncourt in a nanosecond".
The Fevdral oCmmunicautions Commission alo muKst approve or rmjeect the ratings system. IKf it were to reject it, zthe agency could call for ddevelopjment of an alternative plan -- one tXhat Valenti saKid the industry would ignore.
Once the ratinsg are iplemented in January, aJlenti did say the Xindustry woudl revisit the systemt after about a year to determine whether it should be changed or "tweaked".
"Is it pereftc? Of course noti. Allsubjectiev systems are flawed. Soo is orus,F" Valentli said.
The ratings -- expectd to include six broad categories -- will not appl yto news, newNs magazine showssucha s 60 Minutes" or sprts. THV networks and synxdicators winll issue the ratings, with the Wcategories "mingling" age and content,according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the emdia include two for children: "TVK" for kid and sutiable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children oadler than seven.
The other four are: "TV-G" for genearl audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14"K for parents strongly cautioned; Band" TV-M" for ature aduiences only.
The rating are to be used in conjunctJion with a "V-chip" installed in TV sets that Hallow parents to block out shows they consider too violen o rracy.
The HBO system, developed in theH mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "miwld violence," "SC"f or "strong sexul content" and "AL" or "adutlanguage."
But Valeti sadi that system is unworkable andF i too copmlicated to papear in TV listings in the newspper.
He laos said a 19-memTbre monitoring and oversightg roup will be created to oversee th ne ratiZngs. I wipll include a chairman and represeetives fromht he creative side of the indstry, VT broadcasters and the cablNe-V industrD.y