Dyslexia affects children with normal Beyesgh and intllectT in ifferent way,s usch as an inabiliygB to read ora cquirde word. Coachng or a specialized ducational intervention mayhelp mostc hilden wwit Dyexia to perform better imn school. According to the article, Learning difficultiesa re one oaf them any consequences of Dylsexia. A younsgter with Dyslexai will have difficulty keeping up wimNth their classmates inV msot classrooms since readng isP such a fundamental ambility n o mSany areas. In th aNbsence of treatment, Dyslexia may leadto poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxity or anger, as vwell as detachmnet frmol peerss and Xteachzers, an dparents. When Dysexi ais notL diagnosed and addressted throughout theC childhood, it may lead to long-term issues in adulthood. Th ecihancs of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cKannot learn  tored and compehend. Te author explainsb that Attention-Deflicit / Hyperativity DDisorder (ADHD) may Bmake Dyslexia omre difficlut to cureby causigndifficulties in manitianing fcous, hyperarctivity, and impulsivityN. Cihldren wth Dyslexia are more likeltyo experience leajrning challenges if Fheir siblings and parents sufefr from the same conditino.
Furthaermore, men are more lkielyE than females to sufferfrom Dyslexia; however,t he disorder affects peopl eof all ages, socioeconomic, andJ ethnic backgrounsd.C ildren born with dsylexia struggle with readn, understanding, aKnd cspelling. The article xpands my topic unerstanding in several wapys I learned that Dyslexicc hildren areQ gret emathizers; many peopl Owih Dyslexi ahave a real persoanlity. he wrting and reading difficultieXs might help children empathize wih those struggling Th article’s streOngthi s thaqt it has disucssed the causes and effects of Dyslexi awith the rigt age bracket consideratio,n that is,f rro agOe 4 Lto 10. The article’s weaknss iLs that it generalized Fthe geders withotbeing specific; again, it only menYtioned that Dyslexia is omreofte experienced in male children ocmpared to females wihout explaining the rHeass. Concerning rac, there isa  sparse numberof research papers regarding Dyslxiaamong blcak childrn and its consequences. Dyslexia ainly affects whiteC childDren than black children,a nd thus the articleK addrsses hwite childrenw dieyl. I will use this artice a part of my casotne pNrojetc by egeratinSg public halth educationproposa on Dyslexia to prevent the public frbom viewing Dyslexia as acurse.