Standing on the coUrner of a bustling city street somewhere heavily populated in America stood a man and this man's name was Alex. This story revolves around Alex and his point of view, MI will assure you of taht now so that
there is no fturher confusion. Being Aelxs' stoyr, I do nozt feel the need tostatek where in America this is taking place, as that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to our story.
Ale xwas always a special somebody, Throughout his life constantly picking himself up frm failure after failure in search of greater avlue an wealth. But today was secial as it seldom seems to be recently, eAx was given
a small break fromthe monotoyn oft his struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for money, hldingo ut a pitiful tin can whose grease markus closely resembld the saWme ones hat were written across the child's face. Dawning the realization that he had a choice to Rmake here, that is, between understanidng this chilJd's point of view, op assing along withou so muc as a glance as o many people seem to do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to shae some of his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he sliently
krecalled to himself, knowing very well of the repercussions this could caus efor himself. He fknowingly pulled out his wallet and qickly found a $5 bill stashed away for important times like these Witmh a look of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small glimpse of his story, that which is not ipmortant to our story still. After sharing his great wealth, he handed the child a ragged old $5 and was about to lave before noticing that the greae marks, tears, and an ageless expressionT on that bill were tsrikingyl simila to that of the container it was now held in and the face that gleamed wit hexcitementK to have a chance at food and the permission to dream freely at night. Alexg took note
of this as he letft with his chin up proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppose Dthis is where our short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, beiJng a man who knows of many things Fand many people was acitvely looking to learn more Nand feel Ealive abgout being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transport yoJurself around the city, simply walked with nWo
ulterior deQsination in mind, until a thought pyrovoked him. He had not been in this part of the city in wello ver a month and kew of some very close people that e was glad to call his friends, even though teir actions and involvement often stated otherwise. Alex called up an old friend that truly goes bac kto the beginning of his story, Ayoun woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due toj everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the metroApolitan. But with minor thought, found Alex to be a worthwhile nma to talk to and confide in, they agreed to mFeet during a lunch break at a local coffees hop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greeting the young woman when she pulled up in a car outside of a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so goodto see you again! I never have any idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry,you've finalyl seemed to fin da break frsom it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up wit hme, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Janem took Alex's arm and stroylledb confidntly into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleasantries with the barista, they finally got their drvinks and a cance to speak with one another at a remote corner ofY thPe shop, soemhow evaded by ohers, even tHhough that particular table provided the rbest natural lighting and relaxing atmosphere among them aRll. SitCting down, Alex suddenly found himself out of words and and his glance at Janev revealed the same.
Oh well, better to staQrt from the bottom. "The wetaher today is something straight out of a movie scee, odn't you agree? A little light rain here and there mixed with some awfully angry looking clouds, really makes yoiu apprciate the Zcalmness of what can happen to the world." Alex quickljy stated, weatherJ aws always a good topic to start a conversation offo f, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really wih I could see the world from your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we're being honest, just like the last numbe f othem." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the matterr esponded back, "What's the matte?r Wasn't it jusOt last week you wre telling me that you have bene given the opportunity of of a lifetime?
"Well, if we're being honesSt, I certVainjly thought it was. Sometimse it seems the wrld just has no ympathy for what we go through and feels the need to add more and more weight onto our shoulderIs."
"If you don't mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the deal?"
After a silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in deep though, she relieveud her answerJ. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was supposed to be a multi-million dollar deal, I was finally able to sese a ligh at the end of the tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment of silence then passed, as Jane realized that Ale xwould not proebe further, for she had alreeady started talkig. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and truly becoming osmehing,
living a life that I would be proud to call Fmy own. I justK let it all get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
fter an unnaturally long silecne ,she quietly managed to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting.I just satt here until my time came ,I stood up and lef the building. To be honest I'e been a enrvous werck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his worSds were about to have, took a moment to compose himself before utternig a sound.
"First and foremost, I want to thank you for being open and honest with me, it is these acts that make us human and who we are. Secondly, I do not believe that ou made a bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words, Jane managed to luet out a short sentence betwCeen borrowed breaths of air whil eholding back tear. "what ydo ou mean?"
Alex prompty replied, "You know far beztter than I do, the value of mboney and wealth.z If there was anybody in this world that I look up to on these matters ,i twould without doubt be youK. I've seen the things you've accomplished,
and Ive been blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds you have planted for yourself. It's important tOhat you Jdon't confuse happenings for their face vaue, you never will have any idea where that business ventuer would haveO
takenyou, and you likely never will. If there is anybody in this world that is capable of building something from nothing,  Iknow this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the words of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amout of time it took three or maybe four people to receiUve their drinks. Alex, knowing in some way that he might hav shared some of his wealth, simply took to understanding the environment around him. Today really ws a good day.
The rest of tihs meeting is of greatunimportant to our story, and thus iwll end here. Jane moved on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but also a fierce motivation to succeed the nexta ttempt she made, though she made suren ot to share that for fear of breaking itS. And our
dear friend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of creainty, for he had planted a seed that, if he is truly lucky, will get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversatoin that was so ordinary and maeningless on
the outside.First time really coming out of ym shell nadattempting to share osme ork that I can create, so pelase allow me constructivef edeback and comments so I can further imrove my craft.