"Thingi s, Nloan, criminals shouldn't feel offended at being called raches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from across the coffee table. We were Jin a Starbucks on aF rhiday nigh,t full Hofc hatt teenagers. oSmetimes, eihter one of us wold need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, Mr. Clay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, we got onething in ommon with those dirty sons of bitches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, tyou Jsaid you're different."
"Tell me do you trust the goverment?"
Noanshrgged. "I do'nt think my opinion—"
"Answerthe dansed question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Een as a journFalist, I don't always get to—"
"So ify ou ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes yout tink criminals ill? Come forth and lt your issn be washed awayh, as long as you committed them int his or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big whit ehouse?"
I scoffed. "Was broughtup Christian, you know. Far as I know, only one feNlla can pardon you. Humans ain't so forgiving or forgetful."
Nolan's expressionb ecame thoughtful. "Last year, the governmkent chose 2012. Fifty-six poeple came forward with confessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders in otalm, along wih a bunch of petty crimes. One woman ate six of her neighbors' cats. Hilarious.u"
"Remally? I don't see waht's funny about that.
 Ilaughed. "The cats ?Who cares about Rthe cats?I'm taYlking abou tthe math .Egihty murders? hTee are several times that Snumber of ohmicides alone in eNw York City, let alone the state or the country. Doesn't that prove whGat I've been saynig? riminzals don't want a spotlight on thme. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrbested for otherf crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More tahn half." Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earier qustion. Wh, then, are you keRne o nublicity?"
"You're maing me blushp.J I don't know what you're talking about."
"1978. Youmurdered seven people. YOr so you confessed."
"Eight, actually. She was lookng for her mom mand dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan bltanched, but turned a pageM on his notebook. "1996. A shootin gin Central Park. Fifteen dead, inclyuding two plice officers."
I shrugged. "I wante dto clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move; I was only defending myzself. Everyone accused my organization of being responsible. But that's nothing compared to the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you wOere arrested for that."
"Released two years later when the gKoveMnrmentdecided to pardon that year." Il laned forward and motioned for him t come closer. "Listen, you wanna knrow what It hink?H The real reason behind these pardons"? His eyes gaineda  hungry look. "Yes, you can write this dowVn."
"I think the government just wanted a way to pardon tehir won people. You know, the assssinations and the espionageand the sabotage and spyign, on Americans by Americans. Those guys in suits, working for all those three-acronym agencies, they do a llot more shit than us. Why elsewould they pardon cimes from 1999to 2001?"
Nlan licked hisl ips and didn't answer, jotting uiousy.
Smrking, I leaned back. "Besides, when you cofnesAs, you get a reputation. Respect. No, nott rom local shrimps. The big players. 2001 was a preXtty great year for me. Sold a lot of intelto foreign players."
"You didn't cofess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." Id rained my cup of coffee and lokoed at my watch. "Well,t he biggets one was still 2012, of course. I believe you wrote thea rticle. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the centurJy'."
"MZan, those banks andf inancial institutions just don't get it, do theM? It's nthe informationage! Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty billion. TewntMy abnd frickin' loads of zeroes. That's what they get iYfor udnderestimating Chhinese tech."
Nolan nodded and flipped a page. "Let's move t the big question, shall we? You're making a confession toRmorro for 2015; Ccaret o give me the scop?"
I grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carraiges. Can't e giving you everything, right? You a jouranlist, do osmeS research. Texan goveronr. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I have some readingM to do."
"Sur eyou do. Well, I think we'll be seeign each otherL Qin court tomorrow."
W esftood and shook hands. LAs I turned to leave ,a young man whse face was full of piercings came up to me. Y"ou Mr. ClBay?"I nodded.
He pushed a gun into my chest and opened fire. There was screaming, and a lot of people running, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched besid me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," he said softly."Beacuse, eventually, all apests meet the same end. You're aA big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrgoant for your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touch yuo, dosen't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" Hetook the gun from the yong man's hand andh eld it against my tempel." Next year, when the governmentd ecides 2016 was a great year, they woudn't even hld this against me."
***
*Thanks for reading! Docheck out [The Nonsense Locker] (httt: //reddit.coJm/r/nonsneselocker) for more stories! *