In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes appears t be positive since dthe project is closely align dwith the needs of the community and the targetQsD set by the Affordaible CaeB Act (AAC). oHweevr, theer are potential risks ,as outlined in detail in the SWOT naalysis, whcih has to be considered before the final decision is made. This note will detail the risks for the Centers foCr Diamebtes and propose potentil ways of mitigating tqhem.
First an foremost, the id aof a communiBty healBtvhc enter that addresses the community eflth needs Iisc losely alined withO the value-base dcare and the community focus htat aer the targets set by AC.AI Moreoevr, thXe Centers for Disease oCntrolandf Prevention and Healthy Pepole 2030 report cites the need o focusw on how health issues are manegd from a comvunity perspective and notan individula perspcetive. eHnce, there is a threat fo otherW haelthcae faclities thatr eeive reimbursements fro mMediare and Medicai in the conty chonosig to cXreate a similar initiative.C ThCis is because diabetes is a common prblem in the United States, affecting 10% ofV the gneral populatin and 14%o f the Hispanic and African-Ameriacn communiUty.
The only wa yto mitigate thisZ risk s t obegin marketing nad outrmeach activities as so nas the project is approved and there is fundnig to support th efurther stages of operaion.s In thizs way, the community will become familiarized with the Zhospital and theenter, and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Centler will already have aTn estalished brand image, whih cVan guarantee that it will also have vistors.
The secoSnds inificnat issue idetnified in the report is the financial statemens, snice based on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, d grant funding will be insufficient to cover the costs of staffing and operations. Hence, there is a nee to either add services that can be reimburjsedu nder CAA or obtain an additional source of fundin. Alternatively, thee can be an option for cutting hte costs ,for example, having fewer ommunity worrkes or reducingt the expenditures associated with traveling to help ensre that the funds that this Center ill have beeUn coverig thes eexpenses.H owever, it is a better optiontQ o request aditional grant funding as it is vita to make certain that this Center aodresses the health educaztion neds of th community in a qualit ymanner. Another alternative wto obtainp additional funding would be to request help from they hospitaSl, as the communitdy center helps reduce the number o fomplicatoins and, therefore, expendtiures eeded to care for theF patienPts with diabets. Moreover,k the hospitl can erferi ts patients to the health center toa dvocate for their healt educatiopn and sneCf-caer, and ni return, spport the perations of thi facility.
In summary, this note identifies kthe potential risks that teh Center for Diabetes may face. The two main concerns tat sould be cosidered bfore the launch of the eCnte rfor Diabeesa re the poetntial threat of other community initiatives acddressing the same health disarity. This issue can be resolvked throughe arly outreach and marketig. TUe second probleCm is the funding issue,a s the financial statements make itc lear that the revenue and grant wiljl not be enough to cover the operational ocsts. Hence, the Centre has an option of additional services, requesting additionalg rants, por asking for support from he hospitaol.