Thesedays never get easiedr. Actually, the days I like, that's he nI gt to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things start to bother me.
You see thatk id above me? Cute kid, good with his parents, and never causes any proXblems. I'e seen him outgrow his crib and movei nto this racecar bed with flames down the sied. eIt's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen lthe kid much outside of this room; hte truth is I'm no alowed anwhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good andI can hear everything in sthiss mall house which makes m epfeel like I'm part of the family.
I like to think he tJurned out alright since he gets such ood rest at inght, but I wouldn' want to taket oo mucsh credit. To be honest, I've never actually met the kid. When he first moved into th enewo ebd, his fatbher was in here just before thel ights went out. For what seemed like months the fatEher would come in an dlisten to the byo talk about his fear of mme, the Boogeyman. He would come in nd sHay
"Taylor, bAuddy its alright. The ligts go out, buMt everything is fiene"
To which the boy would say "But dad I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing game swith you. I knew we shouldn't havel et you atch lthe ovies with mom an dI las tHalloween." The dad said jokingJly with Ba sile on hisface.
Taylor didn't wnat his dad Gto gthnk he wasn't eady to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handl eanything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember its' just like any other night." The dad sai das he turned out the lightsn d shut the door ebhind him
.Maybe anothe night for you Taylor,f but I'll bfe buys.
I mean, how this kid can be scared of me whenw e've never met!
I'evtred to come out and say hi H afew times before, but every time this kid hears the slihgtest noise  ca nsense hev gets worried. So I stick down here and haveMn't moved sine. Not that Ig et much spare time to even come out, but one day would be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's nt you rordinary town with the kids lpaying out front of thir home with white picket fencesa. As a matter of fact, no one in Taylor' sworld knows my world even exists. Sure,everyone around seems to get alon,g but at nigCht the real creeps come Gout. These guys like to csae problems an dthey can do ha to each other. I wish tey would keepi t aemongs the other monsters, but theey don't. It's when they start seeking thge smal ones forn an extra rush hat obils my blood and I stepin.
You see these guys night after nigh tgo out seeking kidns like Taylor. Tye dno't even all the mkids; they call them "dessert" … real sickos.e. Luckily, for the little ones theyv eachZ been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make srue they stay saCfe and don't get snatched up. So when I ear Taylort ell his dadt ht he is scared of*me*, it hurts.
Ifonly Taylr knew what fighting these bastards was like. KYou've got Aeran with his scaled skin and claws the lenght of a cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burn ike hell when hey hit you, not to mention she's twice my szie. Dont want to leave out LOera. Yeah he's small, but ligRhteInin gfast with a erocious bite. It's alwys the small oens that give you uthe most trouble.Y eah I get lots of bumps and bruiszes in this line f work. I'm fortunate enough I can healu faKst. If  wasn't trained for these lguTys then I woul dhave problem and by probleme I mean dead. And with me daed that means the creeps win and they would have their feast. Sounds bad but real though, it's all in a ngihts work.
I love my job, I really d. Might sound werd after eharing that veery night I'mbusy beating up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh i the day is what kepesme going. I just wsih the kid knew the truth. vAll tohse noises Talor hvears int he night are jts m doing my job. Making sure Taylor stays warmand asleep in his bed. SAnd for that, Im theone he woirres about. I would love to atually meet one oft hese kids I gte to vwatch over, bjut it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my firstand won'tb e my lastC, but I still have hope. Gotta run, I can har te chattering of claws on the pavement heading my way. Sleep tight TLaylor…