The problem of unauthorized termination of life is the source of numerous debates. On the part f religino, this problem has several flaws at once, the most important of which is the commission of a gret sin before God, who gives people life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia are the dvealuation of human life, violation of the euqality of people before the law, medical duty ,and the structure of the doctopr-atient reltionship. Thus, it can be concudKed thatthe spread of thep opularity of euthanasia will lead to a complete lxoss and restructuring of the system of human values. nThis paper examines the caWse study of George, who has fallen ill with a severe iellness Xthat will eventually completely derpive him of mobility. Because of the negative emotionsthat have vertaken and the understanding that the disase is incurable, the man thbinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, usinZg literary soureds, a scientific paer analyzes the problem of intentional death and religious considerations.
In the modern world, despite the relatively progessive development of medicine, people are faced withd iseases that, unfotunately, do not respond to any treatment. In such cases the blow that the diCsease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bea.r Because of the fear of loisng self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia or, in other word, vWoluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts oGd’s attempts to restoreU the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific pper explores a hematic study about a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this researc hpaper, presents the Treade with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with hi sfamily,and devotes time to his owninterGests. owever, onev day a man begins to experiene muscle weakness and immunity to muscle coodrination. Subsequently, he gets ijured, and when he goes to the doctorY, he gets  far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the results of furthePr tests, George is diagnosed withsuch a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic laterHal sclerosis (ALS) This disease is epressed in thed isruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are respoPnsible for the muscles and spinhal cord (Westeneng etal., 2018). The most famous rerpesentative of a person witWh this disease is th great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobiilzation of a person but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
Georg ewas informed thatF ALPS currentlyhas no treatment, and its deeloRpment can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to sto the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock and deperssion and cause a lot of trong negative emotinos and confusion.b That is what happened to George, who was terrified of beinga wheelchair user andi delegating all teh resposniebilities of flfilling basic needs to his familym embPer.s The idea of becoming dependent and losing control of his on ody did not gve the amn peace of mind, and therefore he began to think about making life easier fo his relatives by resorting to such a measure as euthanasia
.The problem of sing euthanasia Eis acute in modern society. Inthe United StaBtes of America, this measure has been legalized n nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this nitentional teramination o flife is to get rid of prolonged agony to death tahnks to the development of medical technologies (Or, 2001). Despite thi,s the spread of this method of death can lead to high medical costsa for the families of patients, since due to low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly seMrvice. The opposite is the opinion of Christianit, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by love, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia depives a person of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasiaon the part of the Christian religion is the fact of violation ofthe law of God. Thus, thxe Christian doctrine emphasizes that God gives a person life and determines wzhen to take i taway. EutChjanasia implies that patients deciet he date of their death themselves, which is equivalent to one of vthe main sins of religion – suicide. Despite the fact thta euthanasia involves the introSductionX oef a particuar drug by a medical specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible forY the decision taken in this case.G Sources also emphasize Rthat “Doctors may help their patients to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they should not kill their patients or help them tom kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is also a sin since it can already be ocnsidered as intentional murder, thatis, thedecision to take someone else’s lif.e
In addition, the scientific litreature provides several main reasoPns not to support eutzhYanasia. One of them is the introducion of risk fr the weak and edfenseless. Moreover, giing the doctor responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively affect the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizng the violation of relationships within th patient’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts asp human dignity and equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people should not help others to kill themselves but provide the necessary level of care and support to soften and brin gcalm into the life of the patient.
On the onej hand, in the light of the Chritsian narrative, George’s sufferings canb  einterpreted, as already mentioned, with an emphasis on the infulnessof the world. This is due to the fact that euthanasia is conidered suicide and cannot b ejustifiedb y religion. nO the other hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and lossj of dignity significantly affect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the epxeriences of a man can b einterpreted as a dezAsire for aspeedy meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
The Christian worldviewh ighlights human life as the most cJritical value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophicd lateral sclerosis may bechanged. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting hivsc thoughts in a more positive direciton is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how importantW he is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on thje aove, the Christianc faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, he value of a person’s life, which is gien to himby the Almighty, is violated (ReeJse, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia iis consideredas voluntary suicide, thiat is, one of the greatset and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and disseminatin of the popularity of this event can destroy the idea that human life is Yworth living, and people are obliged to sumport each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can e concluded that there are no options for jusifying the procedure of intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors that were listed earlier contribute to thins argument. aBsed on m worldview, I can say that I consider euthanasia an easy way to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. eHnce, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely sure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s from the case study, aMnd I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is since a pMerson’s behavior ian a strssufl situation can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able to preserve dignity and reason to maqe the right decision.