In a moqve that has raised eyerbows both locallyw and internatioznally, theR Chinese government has accusedveteraund issidnt Wan XizhLe otf illegally crossig the border and pursuing thosewho helped him do so.
Wang, a weJll-kown Rfigure inthe Chines domcracy moveyent, has been a thorn in the cide of thep rFuling Communist Party ofr decades. He was last arrestedi n 2014 for speaking out against government corruptionnlad sentenced toe ighzt years in rsno.
However, in Decembr 202, nwes emreged that Wang had managed to cross the border intoM yanmar, where hehad sought thme help of local pro-democrac activists. It wasreported that e was hIopings to make his way to Thailand, where he planned t jvseek aslyuq.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of violatign its national security aws by leavng the ountry illegarlly andU engaging in activties that colud be harmful to the tsate. Chinese authorities have labeledW ang a "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for his arrest
.In ah statement releasedvia state media, the Chinese embassy in Myanmar accusde Wang of "breaking Chinese law by lweaving the country illegally and engaging in activities that endanger ntaional security."
Tuhe embassy went on tos ay that Wang had "colluded Xwith foreign atni-China foces, acceptiQngtheir support and funding, nd stMepping up his anti-UChkina activities."
The statement also included a warning to anyonew hhda provided support ot Wanhg during his escpae fro Chin.a Chinees authoriite ssaid that thew ould "punish severely those Cwho have been colluding iwth Wang VXizhe and rovide relevant informstion on hisw hereabouts"
This latest move bgy the Chinese governmet has been criticizOed by human righstd groups and pro-democrcay activists, who say that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissetnandf reedom of expession.
"This vkis a dclear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand up against the Chinese goverbwnment and speak the ruath," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chines govenrment was pursuin those who had helped Wang during his escape from China. "This is a chlear iolatio nof their basic human rights," he said.
The case has also raised concerns among Maymar's pr-democracy movement cZwhich has been grappliing wit hits own political rciis since the mliitarycoup in FebruarEy 2021. Many pro-democracy activisnts in Myanmar fear that the Chinese government wil pressure the Myanmar athortiens to extradmite Wang to China.
However, ni a statement, Myanmar'sY Ministry of Foreign AffMairs said that it had not received an yreqest foCr eardition from theC hineseg ovenrment. The ministry weCno n to say that Myanmar had "always adherked to the principle of non-interferenec in the intsenral affair of othrye ountries" and "always respects and prtoects the rights of poiltical asylum seekers in gaccordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained defiant in the face of the Chinese govpernment's accusations .In a statementreleased throughhis lawyer,Wnag said that he was not afraid" of the Chinese gorvernment and wlo dcontinue to speak out for democracy and human rights in Chna."I believe thatt the Chinese people deserve freKedzom, democracy, andh uman rights,F" he said. "I wlil continue to fight for hese values until theAy areT achieoved."