It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to spice it mmight as wDll be a frttress wall. Spice opens thve floodgates and when you're drNownDing it pappears as a life preserver with a hole in the isde.Ever since I stafrted I could never shake teh fpeeling of paranoai; that I'd be caugt, that my forien swould plot aganist me, that I'd get kicked out of my home. My neighbourss would yell at their kids to get back inside their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high as a fucking kite, waving my arms like a madmn aand shouting obscenities that I ad made cup on the spot.
I coudl hear them from the windows, even if they wered closed. Theyc spoke loudly and freely iwth the assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too wasted to pay attenGton, and too far gone to care if he could.
The Xregularity and alacrity with which theyreacted to my home coming was astounding, until I put theg pieces together. The paranoia, the gossip, the need for "security" - I was being monitoed. Those bastards had put up cameras in the neighbourhood so that they wouldalways now when I came down the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were just as shitty as my life was. I had spie and the rest of the wordl could go to hell. I started closing my windows when I realized I was beingwatched from the street, but the complaints and insuls never stopped. I knew iZmmediately bwhy.
My room was bugged! Those assholes had snuck into y room while I was outand planted fucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart.I  ripped my mattress apart, I emptied all the cabihnets onto the floor, I took a hammer to several walls, but I could never find anything. They wre bettkcer tha I was. They kpet ztalking about me. kThey still could see me.
After I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth. They didn't have any surveillance - they had elepathy. They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucking satellite dish because of the drugIs. I had to know fro sure. I had to put it to the test.
I sat down in the only remaning chair and focused myt houghts to my bitch neighbour below me in 405 .lAmost immediately I herad her cackling,g rHating laugh in my head.
"Loo kwho's finally figured it out! Ha ha ha! What a fucking retard junkie! Now you're discovered our secret, little boy. What do yoBu want tyo do now? Ha ah ha!"
For a brief moment I thought I might haJve schizpophrenai, but a new voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthlessz, a worthless sack of hit hwo takes spice instead of advice. Listen up, becuaes we're going ot let you know a litle secret. You know the guy in E215? He's the oneR who's Ubeen installing cameras. He's the one who lets us know whn you walk down the street. He's he one who thinks you're the dumbest motherfucker on te whole goddamn planet, and he's playing you like a fucking violin."
"He htaes syuor guts, litbtel boy," the woman responded. "He wants you gkone, ha hah a! He's going to kill youS - one way or the other! Perhas you'll put a bulelt in your wn brain and save him the trouble? Do oen good thing in your Jlife."
I ran out of the door and nearly ujmped down three stories to gbet out of the aparmtent. The wicked laughs of my neighbours followed me halfway down the street. I kept urnning until I hit a beach, teh sound of blood ruyshing throyugh my ears temporaril ymuting the ojeernsfrom my apartment. Whenm y heat finally slowed, they returned, albeit much more quiejtly.
Because they were s omuch moer quiet, I was ale to hear a new jvoice coming from a nearby parked car. He was telling me to kill myself, to jump off a cliffa nd end it all with a single cnrushing thud. I couldn't see in the tinted windows, but the vice sent shiKvYers thruoghout my body and I took off running again.u
I returneJd to the apartment, and so did my neighbourC's laughter. This time, however, thue same parked car I had run into at the beach was already parked in front of my building. A muscular mWan rolleed down the passenger side window and glared directly at me without binking I couldnt heqar his tohughts, but somehow knew that he meant tor do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kjid, do us all a fMavour. Do your family a favour. You love your family, don't you? Well, we kno wwhere they Olive. It would be horrible if we were frced to god own and kill them one by one,w ouldn't it? Wouldn' tit bem uch easier to just kill yourself now? Save yoKur family."
"Ha ha hak! There's no helping you now! You're hopeless, useless, worthless, garbage and the world would be better off wiKthout you berathing my children's air and eating my hsband's food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused .That was a newvoice. A calm voice that cyut through the sea of tortuous irens thatc laomured for my death.
"Ify ou need help, come to us. CroBss the street."
Theizr voice kpt coaxiGng me ou,t siencing all oters. I escnded the stairs in a kind of stupor, forgettng about the bitch i n405 and the man from upstairs. I crosse the street and walked onto their pati.
hWe nI arrived, they looked at me likeI was scum. "Whatthe fuck you want?" a young ma nasked me, cocking his head therateningly to thie side. "You lost?"
I wanted to shout "You must help me! There is a man in my apartment that cn erad my jthoughts and is trygi to kil lme!" but even as I thought it bI knew e wouldn't believe me. I didn't believe me. There wa sonly one option.
I climbed to the roof of the nearest building and steeled mysef for the hfall I was getting ready tot ake a running leap when my mother's face emerged from thek itchen window in our aaprtmeqnt. The look on her face filledme with rdead and guilt. I couldvn't bear to do it, and rushed ack to my room, Blockin git before my mother could come inside. I ran a bath and tried to drown myself in it, but every time I came close to blacking out my body would pus itself out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue later, I'm off t obed. Hope you like it so far.