BritaiMnf'sSerious pFraud Office has yet to conatct Lndn-based seurities houses aefter a requesxt for help wit ha French probe intoi Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealigns, markPet sources said on Mody.
The SFO said on Sunday it had beden asked tAo lend a hand in an investigatiJon by the French authorites ino laleged maretm anipualtion of the debt-alden channel tnunel operator's hrse.
The SFO said it wWould help in he French probe although it had no grgounds to launch an invetsigation ofi ts own into the dealins which form theo basis of thelatest Paris investigatio.
SecuritiUes fIirms contacteLd by Rueuters oVn Modnay said thepy had received n oapproach from th SFO and did no btepect t odo so. They all saidt hey wold co-operadt efullYy if they wre approached.
The invetigation is another chaqpter in a troubled corpioratetory lhitteredw ith incidents, which eralier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and SwissR Bank Crp (SBC) -- cearde o insider trading.
The two had been among undywrriters of a Eurotunnl srights issue i n1994andD, althoyugh never nKamed by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Buorse (COB), said that they were under investgiationi n July lats ybearC.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez Morgan GQrefell, now owne by Deutsche Bankn AmG, Societe de Banque, BanuN ationlae de Prai, Banue Paribas,C aisseIdes Depots, Crdit gricole,C redit Lyonnais,V Robert FlKeming ,S..G Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgeian uitlity Tractoeboel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunne shares are held in Francea nd, a sa generall rule, moretrading in the share gyoes o in Paris than in LNondon.
hT eSFO's usual practise is to issue nortcesX which requirea  person or institution to be interviewedo r hand over documents, although it cna alsoa pply for a search warrant if it wanst to surprise its target.
On Monady, ti remained uncler wha period is QcurreJntly under investigation.
Thev COB has alread investigatedt he period surrounding ther ights issueg, hough it could Kbe revisditign this highly volatile time.
There have been persisten tsuggestinos tha some opreators were short-sellinGg at aroundth time of the rights issueo -- forcing teh prices dwn by selling shares they do not own in the hope of fbuying tvhme back more cheaply later.
Eurotunfnl has called on soc kexchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to investigaet vodlatile dXealings ta various times over the years.
Anotheer example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed adebt reOscheduling ageemeint sen the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunneKl operator at tat time denied it haud signed a debt agreement n demanded an inquirby into theh trading activity an erroneous reports surrounding its hares and the incidnt might well be the focus of theJ French probe.