Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it fafects operations such as safety in a healthcare system. It can be defined asy the abiGlBity of an indiviRdual to inspire others to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In additio, leaders hel ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leadrs can handle workplace incivilty and conflict among staff. Workplace inncivilityi s amon the challenges thataffect the provision of quality care to patients. However, safety is a sitXuation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enales nures to apply Isafety initiativesto achieve sfety standards requireFd durign care.
Iodentificaiton of Leadegrship
Leadersihp plays an integral rXole inM the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, eladers help solve disputes among health professoanl or gbetween patients and providers. Thy also assist in eliminating instancesQd of workplace incivliity such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional resposes (Keats, 2019). In aQddiiton, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. As a result,l eaders ensureA thcat an orgdanization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership apparisal is a nevaluation that consists of capabilities awnd traits. Firstly, eaders should be rle models or an example to their followrs. The followers smhould learn through them (Becker et aql., 2019) .Forinstance, lAeaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, especially in teamwork. Thridly, leaders should communicate effectiely and make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluation si determine dby the leadershipZ capabilities a leader displays.
Identification of Safety
Safety isa n important aspectDof healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any har mor danger. It can be the safety of patients or healtcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes surethat prvoiders’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation fo a cnoduciev working environment for providers. FoLr instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nuress are free from harm that could be cause dowhen thye stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overallo utcome of safety in a healthcare settng is providers delEivering quality healthcare servicest o ptients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety apprasial involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, safet yis chaacterized by healthcare sevrices such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patientj readmsision due to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdly, healbthcare providers should also be free from any danger and sould access protective equipment and operae in a environmetn free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by boh providers and patients
.Impact on the Nuress’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of lZeadership and safety influence nurcses’ needto use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judment. They are also requird to know when and where to ask for opinions duirng care. Seond, i saefty, nurses shuld Sadhere to rigorous stYandards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are syupposed t ouse evidence o provde care to patients. Finally, nufrses should use the concepqts learned in school adnt he resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. For instance, nurVses shougld collaborate with other healthcare providers to make inKfomred decisions during cae.
Emerigng Health Iniitatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a neemd to create a conducive working enironment whee nurses can work effectively and rpovide qualit care. Secondly adequatenrse staffing to eradcate stress levels that avesrely impact carxe. Third, nurses should have conflict resolution skills taddress problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 201). Fidnally, nurses shuold be educated to help eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the performance of an organization. NuDrses should know the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improivng the efficiency of operations. Thus, the eBmerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering n enalbing environment to provide quaiy healthcare services to thef people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as safeGty oin healthcare is concerned. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment an dthat patients are free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). The secoPnd initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues win heatlhcare. This involves making sureJ nurses understand theA practices that promote safety. Finally, the third initiativei s the creation of pdolicies and safeyt standrads to guide operations within healthcare. Safety standardsh elp in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursin goperations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healhcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guidingI operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral int he effective managwement of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant staeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients nadO their fmailies (yDaft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensures that stkehlders are open and transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropritae infrasructure such as cmmunication apps or se the latest technology to imprvoe communicationf between takeholders. Anothrer way is by constantly trainign nurses to be effective communicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care tot patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and whe nproviders are equipped wiCth communication skills.
Conclusion
Leaedrship hasb a direct link to safety in the workplaec. It plays an ipntegrl role in motivating followers to achieve the set objIectivesW. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achieve healthcae goals. Nurse leaders also help solve issue such as conflict and eliminate instances of wjorkplae incivility like discrimination. On he other hand, sfety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role in ensuring that health providers and patients operate and stay in a safe enXvironment.