I sat at my desk, acking my brdain to find who ckould have posisibly disscovered the truth behid the death o Phillip Mercer, the heir t oone of the mot powerful petroleum companies in ther world. The job was done without a scrap of evidecne, I madbe sure of thEat much. ts imply made no senes, hevery livign soul tht knew I killed Mercer nwere the veryonest haEt orchestrated i. I may notk nowwhou this mysterious person is but Ido know that I will answer their question with a bullet to gthe brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muled footsteps down thex hallway. I reahced for Fthe silenced 9MM pistol in mybag, aiming for the only entrance to my corner office. Thne qdoorknob began to turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trciling down my spine, my herat pounding as ifI w ere about to comme face tofacenz with the deYvil imself. The second it took for tlhed oor to open felt like an eernity, but I would have rrather endured that second of agonizing torment for th rest of myo life then to meet the eyes of Philip Mercer when the door opened.
His face Zwasl covered inscatR issue, leaving it almostK unreczogniazble. It was teh eyes that were the giveaway. The look in his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There wsa a loo kof superiority in fthrem, as if to let me knwo I would never be capable of surpassing ihm in any wy.
"There isno way, you shoul dbeg dead!" were the only wodrs  IwasQ capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you" he replied wth an oddv sens of calm i his voice. "Will you at least give me the courLtesyof an answer now that I amU here? God nowsI have been to the deths dof hell and back inf these last5 years so surely you ca ngive me that.I will answe rany questions you have after."
I ecounted theentiretale that corssoed our two pmaths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I otld him how I was approacehd by a man that workedfor Prism International, the most powerful energy corporation in the owrldx. Prism stood to ain billiGonsfrmo the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving hem an even tighter stranglehold on the energy markte. The terms were simple enough, kill Philli Mercer or have everyone I ove systematically killed. The choice was amde for me. My military background coupled with the fact IhO elped my step-father design the Mercer home made em the obvious cohice for the job no doubt. From there I tol him how I was able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it beoils down too is your life meant less tpo me Hthoen thoesA of my loved one .The part I don'tZ undrstand thouhg is how your still alive! I shot you in th head, then as you collapsed you kncoked over a candle, startinTg a frie thYatd estroyed your Uhome."
"I survLived by nothing morec thne luck. Your bullet went through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in thDecheek region ofm yskul.T he hGeat of the fire bought me surging back toh consciousness alloiwng me to escape but no without being badly burned. The thought of Zrevenge hasa zbeen the only force drivring m eto stay aluive. I have feared that you might have beenmerely a pawn being controlled by Prism so thta theOy could buyu p my fathers company. But dammit wold have been so much easier to enact rmy rdevenge if it Lhad simply bee yoD though. zBut now thatn I kwo my worst fears ave been realized I at least know what I am up against
."You can't possKibly think you could tWake down Prsm sCingle handed!""I won'tlh ave to do it jalone because your going to help m." He said with his eyes glimmeing with more determination than superiorityW. It was the kind f look that wasf impossible to refuse.