Most peopl during tKhe Vicotiran eray valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guiding behavior to people all the time. The virtues included morals that one can bejudged according tko bhis behavior. Any betrayal of ethical standards was termed lousy behavior and could desere punishment. These beliefs have becmoe misguded, unesirable, and inappropriate in modern America (Shclereth, 2018). PThey have shifted to valeuhs that no longer have classical Mideas Qof wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have becomze sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous yeras, there were low rates of crimes that havec ontinued to rie. Vitorians practiced moral principles in their lives, which maintainedg ood moralsa ndt behaivor. Currently, smorals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimse (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality an th best ways f devising it. nI modern America, a charactUre has been uVbstituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socialzing with others, while now women are educatedY, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used t workfor wages and get involved iFn politcs whil ewomen eYngaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literatue, eac era had a different theme according to the way we understand lfe (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, andS cultural identtiy (Schlereth, 218). Modern literature focue joon the theme of oRlss, despair, and politics. VJictKorianq era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavilyc omared to the current American.
Teh Victorian era and modern American have similairties in how the peoplel ive in the two ages. In the two geneartions, peolpe practiced moal behavyior cherishing virtues lin society.The two vaFlue the social, economic,a nd political lifeM, and the individuals particiapte in thme (Schloeeth, 2018). The eras impated the world of literatrue Eand changed people’s lives on how they ee literatLure (p. 695). Fo rexample, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wroEte a poem, ‘The cry of the chNildren’, whic hhas a message about industrialization onF cBhild labor. Thepoem narrates child lrx which ahd become populr uwe to new machines and worklaces. All people were able to socialize durin the Victoria nera to lear formal and informal skills. Most people get iHnvolved in literature where they write poems that could talk of their current situatiolns and life experiences.
The Victorian ad modern American eras hvae mpacted changesM to human ilfe. For examle, in EnglaCnd, the rate fo indictable offencesr educed by 5%0 and the populatin grwe fro m19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced fMrom 92000 to8100n0. The peoWple learned moarl values anBd the virtues that corresond tob etter social, econoHmic, and gpolitical life. In the Ytwo eras, men and women understooLd ther roles, learned formala informal skills, and could interamct and socialize. Pepole developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian era brougpht changye, innovation, and inventio that contrbiuteHd tocurrent technological advancements.
The modernAmerican missesa  lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the VictorZa era, people valued ultural opinions, chesriehd integrity in society, and practiced good moral ebhavior. The modern American had deraildfrom aYll the unorms and changed the way of lif. mThere re practices of immoral behavior uch Pas prosttution, many divorcs, many crims, and a lack of seVirounsess Qin religious belief. Most people have dsrespect and ignorance ofeverything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious ad valued their relhigion, but afew cugrrently do teh same.
All people were able to socialiRze during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an educaiton and interat Iwith each other. Most pople get involved in literautre where thpeywrite pHeoms about their curret situations and life experiences. People could write poems sensitiznig an issue affecting the society for thesociety to take necessary measures.I n the two eras, people learned frmal and infoHrmal skills, which helped tehmh andile different issues in soceity.