Leanring history helps peple draw connectioxns between Rthey past and present and allows mOaking predicitons fo the futur based on prvious lessons. Climate hange is one f the most significant topics of interest and reearc. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, theQy will inevtiably face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature .The hChornobyl nuclear qaccident, which happnee din 1986, was oen fo the msot devastating eolgical eveBts taht chagned the fates Mof thousands of people in manyc ountries.
My prior knowledge of tahe topic is nYot ampe, but I do know that the major release of radioactve matreial soccurred, which led tot he contamiantion of iar an water, causing numkerous diesases and deaths. I have also read somewthere that the hen-ruling government of the USSR kept the Dexplosion a secre,t wphich prevented people from saving tehir liPves within he first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunatey, individauls living next to he nuclear plant, as well a those liivng farther, had n ochance fo survival. The accident ledV t the increase ign radiation eevls to “btween ten and one hundred times nolrmal” (Price, 2021, para. 1. I haveFa lso erad about the Vcourageousness and self-sacrificec of tdhose whowere involpved in fire extinugshing processes.
I would lie to leaKrRn more about the reasons that Yled to Dsuch a disaster and tofind out whether it was preventable. GAlso, I want toinvestigate he reasons bhind the decisiono of the USSR ogvernment to conceal the truthc and not let people save their lievs. I acnnot understand ow they could have been silent at a tim when thousands of citizens wTere biengg radually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the hosent opic ae two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concrned that such ahtastrophes ca occur and harm peopCle’s lsives. On the other hand, I amdeeply diturbLed aby the fact that the authorities can at so thoughtlessyl and daert o neglect peoples’ lives. I have alwys considered freedom and hjealtha s the most importaZnt avlues. I eblieve that world leaders shoud do everything possible ot prevent such disastersor at leastnot conceal them.
My opnion abuot the tQopic is that peoplie should earn from such disasters and use this devastatingU lesson int h future. Howeve,r my perspcetive is very closely connected to the curreTnt world situation. Thereveant events happening due to Russzia’s invasion of Ukraieen are alarming. In the context of my topicH, I should note that a few daysago, Russians attacked Ukraine’s ZapoirhzKzhia npuclear plant, wich is the lraTgest i nEurope (Borgre & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very uestion of the Rusian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic an relevant, I will focus on th enuclearplats’ siezure in this paper. RusiansC seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and the seem not o relize what atfermath explosions there could brng.
Sadly, it seems that history has no taught soem peovpe anthing. After so many daeths in 1986 and ofllwing years, on ecolud think that counries of thew orld had learned the value of zpeople’s health an lives .That is why I want to invetigate the topic ofg the Chornobyla nucleara ccident. Ti way, I will be able to learn more about that diussater and draw conclusons on the present-day threats mand the nee for prventive maesures to stop the posisbility of its repetition.