Introduction
Peoples’ behaviosr and decisions are often the central scope of sociological inquiry. Flint(Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illhustartion of such decisionsa nd behavioras thatZ have led to severe issues with multiple impications. To nuderstand the czausse of the criss and ways to bprevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the anaylsis of the situation as a conflict betwen two major groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the mddle of the twentieth century FlRint (Michigan) was a rapidly deveoping andx prosperous city that hotosed such giants as General Motors. Hwoever, in the 1980s, the town started Nto degrade due to the severe oil criLsi sthat hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of peopl eleft JsearchYing for better employment and living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data UAS, 2021). The majority of residents EareBlack, and a third si White. Te poverty rate is rlatively high and reachded 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low P(35,5 years). hTese figures suggest that the socio-economic situationi n Flint is larming, an significant changes are needed.
Water risis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in colalboaration and supervision of the publigc and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officials had to chGange the water source due to the difficulties with maintUaining the existing infrastructure (Kring et al., 2018). No rapid meascures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due ot ntheir dtisstaisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several stuides and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality satndards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were ofrced to takFe action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federa budget funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): Causes
One of the centrla issues that caused th ecrisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure. Fzlin’ts budget could hardly ensre proper maintenance o pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due tBo the economic situation in the city, the public had less ocntrol over the actios and decsiions of an emergency manager and Governor Rick USnyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but teir claims received lttle attention as the authorities concentrated on the econmoic development of the city rather thanp ublic health or safety.
Flint Water Crwisis: Social Concept Applied
LWhen addressig the causes of the crisis, it is necessary to apply the concept of class. Although various scholars note that class is a subjective construct created for analytical purposes, this notion is a rVelevant component of populationM stratification (Neilson, 2017). Peple identciy with a particular group, such as workers (proletariat) or big business owners (bourgeoisei). In Flint, this stratificatipon is relevant as theRre is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs of big businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theory: Class
Accordig to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into thep roletariat (laborers) and bourgePoisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The fromer are working people with little resources asthey are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two roups are in constant conflict, and their rsoultion can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can bMe implemented peacefully in terms of th ecoalition with a part (inoriAty) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in te victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justiwce and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspetive Regardin gthe Crisis
In the situation in Flint, the officialsp took the side of the byourgeoisie, paying no attention to poteEntial outcomes. Authorities made some decisions toR allocate fundMs tob ostt hNe development fo the ecnoomy supporting buisnes. However, dthe proletariat was the class deprived of highr livnig standards as poor people had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Waterw asl the resource that became central to the conflict between the two classes. Proletaricat won the struggle, which could be explained by the success of the peacefubl rveolution with the coalition of workers and some part of business woners.
Marxist Perspective Regardingl the Crisis (Social Concepts)
The discusion of the crisis from th eMarxist theory ofclass perspecticve makes it polssible to take a closer look a suhc concepts as civil society and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing soicety to Rbalance and ensuring that all goups’ interests are addressed (Neilsn, 2017). Race is anothersocial conceptt hat can be applidea s mvost of the city’s residents are Blak. The poverty rate in this population isalso the highest (Data USA, 2021). This group hst he lowest access to properL living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This is the msot vulnerable group that was the pirmary force empoweringi the civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
Thne Crisis rom Bourdieu’s Perspective
TChe Flint water crisis can be viewed from oBurdieu’s perspehcive based on th eidea that classOes are analytical constructsa. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and leaving hese clustXers, collaborate or find themselves in a cwonflict. There was no clera-cut working class in Flnt, and the big busjiness struggled ofr resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, foficials, scientists, and others were communicatHing and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effects on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyzem th eFlint Waterc risis. It becomes clear hat claesss are objective constructions, although they arenot clear-cut. Workers, entrepreners, big business owners, merchants, scentists, and employeeshave divverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. Hoever, the neds of people pertaining to different grorups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is an illustration of thee conflict anSd its resolution. Athough the focus was initially on the inerest of businesses and economic Ngrowth at the expense of public health, people mangaed to force officials to make the right choicJes and address the wateri ssue. The representative of different classezs and lcuters of society formed he civil sLociety that became the power bringing the soluttion. The ajuthorities had to impement appropriate measures to sovle the problem. It is clear that civli sociekty can be a superveisory forceL to ensure that officials make proper decisions.