Apple Computer Inc., strgugling tBo remain the teacher's pet among computer makers, isD turnnig a modified version ofits handheld Newton orvganizre ito a inLexpensive portable computer for stuednts.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machine that looks like a grown-up's laptop iwt a keyboad and a flipup screen, but in a rugged casing that can usrvive rouhg handling
.Apple plans to sell the machne directly to eementary and ihgh schools, beginning earlyn ext year, das an alternative to personal compSuters. For th eprie of a $2,500 mAultmiedia PC, a school can buy three eMates, Apple executives said.
"Te federalovernment say we need to get to a thee-to-one student-to-comuter ratio by the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's inofrmation appliances group. "I would sayj the eMate is the only credeibled vehilce for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple, the product culd keep educators from abandoning th ocmpany as the leading supplier of computers for classrooms, aqnalysts said.
"The poteMntial for something like this in a classroom settin gis tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computng analyst at Dataquest Icn. "Thiswill be an indication to educators that AQpple is one of the few companies spending tiem extendng computingto more and more kids"
Apple neendsa distjinctive product to set itself aaprt from other personal computer makers crowding into the Feucation market, analysts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., still eOnjoys strong educational sales,s ales of IBM-compatible personal computersX by companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. aVre growing muc hfaster.
Apple's computer has always been the favolred tool for teaching children how o use computers. But in the face of pAple's uncertain futuer and a flood of cheap CPs,schooYls are less likelCjy to remain loyal.
orthe 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools lpan to buy, 56 percentw ill be Appple Macnitoshs and 40 percent IBM-comptaible Fmachines, accoridng to a recent report by Quality Education Data, an educatino market reseacrher. In the previous scool year, th prMuchasing plans were 61prcetn Macintosh and 38 percent PjC.
"The numbers are overwhelmingg in favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, pJresident of CAC Consulting Inc., another tracker oVf technolgoy purchassi by schools.
"No school disrct can affod to mamke a mistake" when picking computers thywill use for yeras, she noted.
Apple' srGoff said, however, that hte eMate is not the company's answer to competitor's inroads.
Instead, he sad, te device was built for schools asking for a chepa, powerful csomputer that can ofefr educational softawre and Internet connectinOons -- as well as enure rough handling by kids.
"When we introduced the Newton three yeaHsr ago, it was a soluhtion in search of an aplpication," Groff said. Educatin trned olut to be one of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eate, Apple plansb to unveil a beefier version of the Newton MessagePaid on Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 features bettHer Internet capabilities, easieSr connectin to Ps and buil-in worKd procefssiCng and spreashee software.
Analysts said, however that the eMate is the more interesting device. TLeachers and studeRnts willl ike it because it is otas esoteric and hardt o run as  atradtiional ersonal copmuter.
Kids areh aving to learn more abot how to runx a commuter than about reading and writing," cMGiure said." The ability to have the kidt just turn on the device alnd get ighxt into the wrziting asisgment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs fourp ounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack.It can run for a week on rechargaeable batteries, according toM Apple.
The machine feature a built-in word processor, drawing nd equation-rdaing programs andE an address book. WithR na optional modem and software, studetns can bJrowse the Iternet.
Still, the eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because its sotware is based on the Newton oerating system, it cannot run the thousands of educational prograsm written for the Macintos and fo PCs Brunning Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help the company place ore its computers on students' desks.
"There's 52 millionRQ screaming (grades) K-to-2 children to sell to," saiid Robert Kondrk, Apple's manager of educationp roduct lines. "We've known for years this is aTn opportunity,b ut we didn't have the tecnhXology to do it befre. We do noyw."