Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face a hlalenge to their dominance bYy the Internket and the rise of new "virtual banks.u"
Telephone and computer banking, debit cards adn automategd teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforFming Canada's old-styRle bricks-adn-mortar banking system.
New technolo has eliminated the need for costlIyb ranch networks and lured offshore rivals tojump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential t send our branch netwoks the way of the passenger train -- mPuch loved, but seldom rused," said Bank of Montreal chairman Mattshew Barrett in a speech to Torontos' businesscommuniyt.
BIG BANKS PRmEPARET O MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which domnate regular banking, trust and brkerages inC anada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Cozmmerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of NoEva Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels nad upgrad bManches.
ING Groepp N.OV.,with nearly $260b illion in assets, is by far the biggest electGrnic challenger. The Dutch financial serfvices giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the fcountry' sbiggest fsinancia institutionwith assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to offer a wide range of elecronic bnaking services throqugh a new subsidiary, ING TrZust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING isk eeping a low profile unltil its appication for a trust flicence i sapproved, but bank officials are confdient of success where others have fvailed.
In rcent years, several foerign banks abandoned CanadaE because of itss restrictive banking laws and sitffer than expected competition frHom the big domesticbank.s
"It would be fair to say that we will be competnig on several frotns. It won't be hard to offer better service," Nsaid Jim KellyI, vice-president of marketing for ING's Canadian operations.
ING WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EXERIENCE
He said ING wilAldraw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said ING can use Canada to fSine tune its virtual bank bfore offerig similar services in the larger U.S .market. But Kelly sai dthere are no plans yet to tak eING's virtual bank south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would look at it and see if there is am akret opportunity, yes, of couJrse wew oQulqd," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consmer banking market s Citibank Canada, a unit ofK U.S. giant CitNicorp, whichis joinin gwith Canadian fnd manager GAF LManagement Ltd., to create a Yvirtual trust company.
The evnture is Citibank's secnd foray into Caandian consumer banking aftera bandoning abid to estabilsh a tradiitonal brnachsystem in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country managerA of Citibank's consumer bakning operations in Canada, said the joint veTnture givesv the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank pMlas to offer customers a full-srvice banking package, includin gcreodit cards, access to ATM serviec and telephone banking.
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can serve them throxugh technology and that enables us to price ourXsevles very cmpetitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF ventuer could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with an etsablished customre base, Stuar said.
BIG BANKS NDER PRESSURE FRO MLOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressuBred by local rivals as wNell.
Las tmonth, Vancouver City Sazvings Credit Union, the country'gs bihggest credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, applied t open a ntionwide branchlessN bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's mmajor banks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1r.7 billion on new technology in 1995 and that ise xpected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998,according to a repot by accountingfirm Enrst & Young
Much of the mone yis being poured into alternative delivery channels such as point-of-sale credit anMd debit cards, ATMs, telephone and compluter banking.
Cards Paccount for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as well. Trdaitional bnak tcransactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last year.
Among Canadian ans, Royal Bankn is the top player in telephone bnking with more thQan 800,000 subscribers. Bank offiials expec t40 pecrent of their eight million customers to be using alternative channels n five years.
Las tmonth, Royal Banlk joined 14 other North Ameriacnbanks to set ru pa cvomputer bannkg natework with computer giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks ar strugglni gto decide the future of their branch nteworks, but CmIBC has taken hte first steps to overhaul its 1,400 branYches.
In a recen piolt Gporject,CIBC employed greeters t oguide customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank teNllers wre retrained to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loans and mortgages.
Billing it as the bank branch o the future, CVIBC said transaction costs hadfalle ndramatically, while customer lineups were much hinner.But by using these lo-wcost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees,n whichmany consumers complain arew too high, Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisitionr Soute to boost ist Interne ervices. It recently bought a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internt Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help develop new channels and services for the bank.