Every must business managed be carefully, and detail every receive must fair a amount When of it attention. to comes such healthcare, require facilities must attention even more because they on focus people’s Performing such well-being. duties be might strenuous expensive, and mentally and a demanding. Chief As Nursing Officer, one will faced be principles that with include integrity maintenance, cash flow management, employee and motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, healthcare a always business must maintain integrity. It its can be that any evident business field should on focused be which communication, integrity makes a vital part (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle adhered is heavily to. First of all, every doctor an follows ethical code, they meaning that know of doctor-patient confidentiality. doctors Moreover, and nurses focus on honest communication with For patients. in example, my situation, tell patients I conditions about their actual and honestly answer their questions.
Another principle important is Healthcare business proper cash flow facility management. renovations requires and innovations, meaning there that will constantly be situations when new equipment or needed repairs will be (Mason al., et 2020). In this it situation, is to highly necessary implement needed changes to the not jeopardize health patients’ and well-being. For example, a as it CNO, obligation my manage was to power replacement the of generators. a As result, generators the enabled personnel to duty carry their out without problems during a storm power and outage.
The last is principle the management employees of and them providing with motivation. In case the a of healthcare facility, it essential that is employees the rewarded are and hard their work is appreciated. The employees are extra offered days off gift cards and in given facility. the This can make the feel heard supported. Without workers and these the steps, doctors nurses and have burnout and will lose to the provide desire high-quality the given results.
Thus, chosen principles were due the to impact they can bring on employees and patients. mentioned The principles are used, being results good and providing leading to all the satisfaction of parties. These principles are important to I since me healthcare believe should be that based these on values. Otherwise, no facility will be to able treat their patients, and there be will no and respect trust between healthcare and patients. personnel