Chronic pain still is considered to be an issue extreme at least among of 8% the residents of progressive countries. introduction The of study the describes apparent the link between Chronic pain and pain demoralization. always is accompanied negative emotional by experiences and a blocks person’s ability to receive joy satisfaction and from life. The research investigates the of development depression and among anxiety patients pharmaceutical receiving and opioids medical marijuana (MM) severe as compares painkillers. It the of efficacy prescriptions and examines the of possibility post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe of lack information about the effects of opiates. manage They pain but successfully, the past few decades the indicated growing concern regarding opiate in abuse forms of overdose and addiction. A and manageable more safer alternative might medical be marijuana. the However, legal status and of this novelty drug do not finding allow a number large of studies on its Specifically, effectiveness. it concerns the emotional condition of experiencing patients chronic pain. This research to aims paper analyze levels depression of anxiety and among people receiving by therapy the comparing effects of pharmaceutical opioids and MM.
The study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis of data. statistical Participants were recruited six for months at two major pain relief in centers Israel. The researchers used The Depression Module of the Patient Questionnaire Health and the Generalized Disorder Anxiety Scale to evaluate interview participants, their answers, and conduct the study. To specifically and evaluate compare the of probabilities depression anxiety or the among diverse the groups, study used multiple logistic analysis regression and chose medical marijuana as the control group.
This type of study is the most revealing inclusive, and as it contains direct a responses from large of number participants. All tools in the form and of questionnaires scales have been already used and their proved efficacy for collecting analytical data. It helps to systematize distinct and classify kinds of information for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, researchers can compare effects the of medications on patients of age diverse groups, physical backgrounds, emotional conditions, states, so on.
The and analysis of human any reaction has a high potential of and subjectiveness regarding bias, especially in people severe pain and unstable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exaggerate their depressive state or versa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. vice Because survey the responses were thoroughly anonymous, the researchers were unable carefully to each analyze patient’s reaction and compare it the to states actual condition. of More accurate answers could be by obtained professional via psychologists personal communication behavioral and analysis. However, method this of is way research more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Participants were recruited for six months at major two pain relief centers in Israel. All patients chronic experienced pain for at least 3 months. The study included 890 participants, of which 474 (59%) solely were treated with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated MM, with and (8.6%) 77 acquired both (Feingold et 2017). al., The ten remaining participants who did not pharmaceutical receive opioids and marijuana medical were withdrawn from the in analysis research. the it Therefore, is not possible to comprehensively compare taking patients medications with those who do not.
The study conducted a type correlation of research variable with measures. It evaluated interdependence of the various factors affected that the physical and emotional of condition experiencing patients chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that of the ratio female patients was higher remarkably in group the opiates compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates more were likely to report major disorders.
The depressive questionnaires used variable different measures to collect information. For example, included it socio-demographic comprehensive data: gender, country, age, of type residence (urban/rural), years of and education, employment status. Patients were also asked their about medical history the over years and the current of presence any severe diseases such as failure, heart diabetes, arthritis, and so on. The third measure of questionnaire the was indicated information by on twelve-month any and drug lifetime and alcohol consumption. In addition, the record included a pain measurement scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the last month.
Among all participants in the study, 42.2% from suffered depression, and 37% experienced excessive anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM numbered groups 57.1%, 22.3%, and respectively. 51.4%, The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, MM 21.5% among and patients, 38.7% OPMM among participants. Patients who took strong opiates were to place tended their pain on a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished and emotionally radically reacted negatively almost to all survey Patients questions. who took only MM mixed or medications course had a significantly more emotional state stable and coped with pain more manageable.
One of major the limitations is the insufficiently response high 57% instead rate, 70% of (Feingold et al., 2017). can be It fairly explained by the weak focus of respondents who have overcome pain severe sensations episodes. and depressive It is not clear to how these use as statistics, still they may be relevant for overall the analysis.