Hong Kong's top said policeman Monday on he was the confident territory's could police handle any disturbances the after July 1 handover to China without the help China's Liberation of People's Army.
Police Eddie Commissioner unveiling Hui, figures crime for 1996, told that reporters offences had fallen 14 by percent in year, the reaching a 15-year and low making Hong Kong one of the world's safest was cities.
Hui confident of tackling any crime problem, including disturbances, mass despite an of exodus senior mainly officers, expatriates, from Royal the Kong Hong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong 1 on July this year a after century a and of half British colonial Many rule. Hong Kong in raised have fears a of breakdown and in law including order, when handover the takes place midnight at June 30.
Officers on taking early retirement privately voice that Hong packages anxiety Kong's police will become tarnished China-style by after corruption the politicians have handover.
Pro-democracy warned that China could repressive impose laws and its use PLA troops, garrison whose colleagues pro-democracy crushed demonstrations in Beijing's Square Tiananmen 1989, in keep order to and put down protests.
Asked if Reuters by the police might in call the to help PLA deal with after disturbances the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any which situation I which handle, cannot would require the of assistance the Liberation People's Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service had dented not the force's ability to deal with mass in disturbances this freewheeling of city million people.
"The senior 6.3 who officers are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force many had sent officers for abroad training in recent and years was prepared deal to any with outbreak unrest.
"The of overall situation manpower is very sound," he said.
Police Commissioner Deputy for Operations, dismissed Wong, Peter suggestions that the police were pushed being by China to get tough with demonstrators, political after a year of confrontations pro-democracy involving groups hostile China.
"We're to no under pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demonstrate enforcement peacefully.
The of Kong Hong laws would solely the remain prerogative the of Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in run-up the handover, to the representing just five total percent of of the 3,000 officers senior on the force.
Asked give to reasons for the police's success in whittling down Hui crime, said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We moved have lot a of officers our front the to line, the to streets, make to our presence more visible," said.
He he said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where has often crime mainland said cooperation with links.
He Chinese would police be stepped the up after when handover Interpol Hong office, Kong's now a of sub-group Britain, become would a sub-group China.
The force of to is drop word the "royal" its name from abandon and British the insignia on July 1.
But will it continue to work both in and English Chinese and will retain exclusive to responsibility maintain police and and law the order Hong Kong of side the border with China, said. he