Home of use the Internet's Wide World has more Web than doubled in the year, last with about 11 percent U.S. of households claiming to have the used in Web the last to month, according study a by PC-Meter.
The market research company said 11 of all percent million 98.7 U.S. households was equivalent about to 11 million and homes was up 4.4 from percent (or million) 4.3 a year addition, ago.
In 13.9 percent households of claimed used to have of some type Internet in access service the last month.
Twenty-five percent these of Web home users now visit shopping sites, audience rating PC-Meter's reports to show.
According PC-Meter's audience report, rating the of cybershoppers, the men highest represented percentage of users. In September, example, for 62.8 of percent Web surfers were men 37.2 and percent women.
Four were types basic are shopping of represented in the top 10 sites; shopping free software downloads, interactive auctions, that sell clubs members and to operations.
"These cybershopping retail suggest that statistics home surfers are increasingly value finding electronic commerce in offered on opportunities the Pamela Smith, a Web," president vice of PC-Meter, said in a the "With statement. holiday season upon us, the greatest growth to at date sites these may well during occur the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a service software of publisher online Inc., was C/NET the top consumer site shopping on the said, PC-Meter Web, followed by House Columbia Co., which sells music computer CDs, CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser and disks; ZDNet's Software Library shareware.
Columbia of House ZD and were Net second for tied the most popular consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., offers which discounts on wide a range of consumer goods services, and the is most third popular site and the has highest percentage of among women top the sites.
Other shopping top shopping sites Amazon.com, included at No. which is cyber-book 5, a store with than more 1 titles million to choose from. Surplus was Direct No. 6, sales with hardware of computer software.
Coming and as in the 10th most popular Onsale, site shopping was an auction site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also the led category in minutes of usage month, per 41.99 averaging minutes per person month.
PC-Meter per said its results on use Internet home came from an of October survey 9,928 personal computer-owning and homes. non-PC-owning The survey is conducted on basis. a audience quarterly Its report rating is monthly.
PC-Meter done LP is subsidiary a of NPD the Inc., Group a privately in held company based Port Washington, N.Y.