took the first of two Regulators steps to Tuesday slash the cost overseas phone of calls for consumers businesses, and making for it easier and carriers U.S. foreign to negotiate cheaper Federal international rates.
The Communications to hopes Commission save U.S. callers billions of dollars by backing the up new with rules separate a to proposal be unveiled next month to charges cut the carriers U.S. pay foreign phone monopolies to complete calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a for a minute call. domestic But must they shell out an average of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- though even the cost of the are calls not much different, according FCC officials.
"At to cents 99 a you're not minute, going to get a information global highway," complained Chairman FCC Reed rules Hundt.
Tuesday's are targeted at countries whose own phone markets are open to competition from U.S. carriers, in or the are process of officials opening. FCC cited Britain, Canada, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced the Tuesday, FCC will waive rules that limit the ability U.S. of to carriers negotiate rates cheaper overseas calling with an phone whose company own market is open. considered rules The were to crafted prevent market abuse by foreign head monopolies.
Don Gips, the of FCC's said Bureau, International new the rules "will allow competitive rather pressures, than archaic rules," to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. President Gerry Vice said Salemme they "can lead to a reduction significant in the amount American that consumers international for pay the telephone calls."
Under approach, new a company such AT&T as -- with FCC -- approval could ask competing foreign carriers bid to for the right handle to AT&T phone traffic the from States United to foreign a market.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offer end-to-end service from the United States to a market foreign without the existing using rate system for completing calls.
Officials say these rates" "accounting run 10 to five times actual costs, reflecting power the of monopolies state-run unexposed to competition. home U.S. paid carriers overseas their counterparts $5.5 billion more in foreign 1995 than companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting paid rates by both carriers are about equal, the reflects imbalance the that many fact overseas more are calls from the made United States than into calls this country.
International from the States United account about for a quarter of all international calls worldwide.
To reduce the rates, the FCC scheduled proposal for next month would "benchmark" set rates for what U.S. carriers could foreign pay carriers to complete calls. rates, These according to officials, would FCC reflect better actual costs.
The agency must still work out the of details how a long country would have to lower its rates and what steps could be if it taken refused to so.
The do actions FCC come the United as States is to open seeking overseas through telecommunications markets talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation.
The United States has big rate with imbalances Jamaica, China, Hong Mexico, Kong, Columbia and among Argentina, others. Next month's is likely to proposal feathers.
"There ruffle be will from concern around countries world the with the benchmark item. There's about doubt no that," said Gips. the FCC's