was It a warm summer day and was I out for a saw stroll. I them on the other side, down the walking sidewalk, two by two. I didn't pay much attention until under they passed the glow of gaslamp. the had Never I seen such an pair of opposites! the brief For time they under walked the it, illuminated light the pair. The man's limbs were and head covered scars! in had What I for mistaken beard was a a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so overrun densely that I had thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, as if it were manufactured string by string. But her skin is what shocked even me, greater than the man! It had the exquisite most complexion, almost translucent in light, and the I saw nary a flaw on it. I looked to my own marred hands, although compared that to man, it was a I blessing; worried, as small cuts formed my on It arm. began to sting as my seeped sweat fresh into wounds. my Not wanting more I scars, my shook thoughts and negative ran to the couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, my frankness "Excuse sir, I but must how inquiry, it is that your wife is so beautiful, yet are you so…."
The man and woman looked at each other, she turned away, blushing, he and laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, by embarrassed my rudeness.
"Don't worry," he said, putting his arm my around shoulder, "I get it all the time."
"My apologies sir, how, but in this your world, did manage to wife keep you from scarring?"
"Well, see," he said with a "she's wink, not my wife, but my daughter."
I aback. was taken "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell and a joke her lousy! Takes cooking's after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, he said, "Take look a her at peered at finger."
I the daughter, she offered her hand right and saw I a thin streak bright red of on index man her finger.
The pulled me in, "I'm tell gonna you a story."
"Long ago, when I married, was I swore to never have kids. didn't want I children any to born be into this world, so that was that. But wife my had plans, other and so my daughter born. was I in love fell with her and to swore life to devote my As her. she grew, though, I began worry. to 'How would I protect her from the world?' So I set out every to physician, and doctor, scientist I could find, for a asking cure. Of course, if there was a already, cure no one be would like this."
He cleared his throat, took a breath, deep and continued.
"On one particular visit to doctor, a my I daughter had with exiting me upon the and building, I met a man dressed in all black.
I immediately thought, 'This must the be devil' and turned heel back into building.
'Wait,' the the man in black 'I said, can save your daughter.'
I was skeptical and scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am just bored with with bartering souls, I am more it's interested durability.' in The devil continued, see, giggling, 'You I do have power the to stop daughter's your scarring, but I'm not a very person.'
'What charitable do you want want?' I asked.
'I partake you to in a very wager,' simple he said, 'Your won't daughter get but scars, *you* will; more specifically, scar very your daughter gets will be you. transferred If to can you manage wager, this you keep your soul, if not, well, you know what will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, and that he managed to last this so," long.
"And the man continued, "I agreed the devil and pricked mine and daughters my to finger the seal deal. So she grew and up I the blows. took Puberty was time. a rough Children can cruel. be so that But scar on her was finger the last one she'd get, ever I had sure of was that."
I this amazed at man's love for his daughter and his How willpower. much he did pain have endure? to Every scar on body his seemed to pulsate I as wondered I this. "Do asked, you ever regret it? Your deal with the replied devil?"
He with a smile, "Not at all."