Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd to plans further expand in operations Europe before into moving the market, Asian managing director Christopher Butcher said in interview.
"We currently an have in operations North America northern and Europe and can't we see any reason why we start can't doing the same thing the in Mediterranean," told Butcher said Reuters.
Butcher Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in future the as the cost structure for operating improved ferries some fast in in markets the region.  could 
"We be the seeing cost structure Asia, changing so in we are to likely into move some markets in north south Asia and east Butcher Asia," said.
He said as that rose incomes Asia in for the charged ferry amounts services rise, would it making more economical for like operators Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon the said company was looking also at fast ferry from services Darwin Indonesia, to but did he not a expect to be made decision for at a least year.  
"It is one of a of number projects we are looking at in the region," said. he He said Holyman had looked at particular within routes and China Indonesia, but they did fit not within the plans. company's "I would imagine in a few years we would have up something (in there Lennon Asia)," said.
Holyman shares had a showing lacklustre in first its year of but listing, since January this shares year the have more to than doubled make the stock of one strongest the over sharemarket performers the past year.
The shares listed April in at A$2.00 1994 and hit high a of A$6.00 on 11 November and are currently trading around A$5.06. 
The  group Sydney-based was on floated local the in bourse 1994, April as part of a from spin-off TNT Ltd, the when transport was group assets selling to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher think said.
"I there has lot been hard a of work past done over the to year educate shareholders in what the company is and doing the where company is going as was there a perception there that out we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said. 
Holyman's  main activities are its fast services in ferry across Australia, the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates a pipeline, gas commodity handling bulk and freight forwarding businesses.
"There a are number of different projects and we businesses, found are quite there a lot of common threads going through," Butcher "I said. think these operations all their own have opportunties place and there are to expand these further," said.
Butcher he TNT worked for with 25 before years taking charge of Holyman when it from split TNT.  
Butcher said the group no had plans raise to capital fund to the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In Holyman October, bought a fast ferry passenger for A$43 He million. said there was plans no for immediate any purchases of ferries.
Butcher more said could he comment not on its trading performance earnings or reported a forecasts.
Holyman net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar The 1995. group posted a profit of net million in A$15.03 the six months June to 30, up 1996, A$6.79 from million earlier.