Genetics are such strange a such thing, a bizarre coincidence of DNA traits. and Take I me for have example. a very unique Immutable, genome. my calls doctor it. Apparently that means that even when bitten by a attacked vampire, by a or werewolf, cursed even by remain I magic, Stubbornly human. in so, fact. I'm nearly 1400 years old, yet another trait strange of my genome. immutable cells My replicate giving perfectly, me a and immortality theoretical really I don't get I sick. Like said, genetics are I funny. was When born, remember I being treated as a freak, someone strange and different. My doctors took a lot of blood and tissue samples, and I remember spending a lot of time with needles in me. Then of course, came the started Upheaval.
It about fifty after years I born, was it and continued nearly for three centuries. Mankind slowly went extinct, our place taken by the supernatural of creatures legends. No one knows really how it started, but it began in Europe. Vampires Werewolves and and emerged killing began and everyone turning they could find. Then came the Fomor, Seelie and the Unseelie, all and the other Gloaming By creatures. end, the human every had been or turned killed, except one. I kept was a as science experiment by one of vampire the lords, man a named who Kristoff, continually subjected to me new methods turning of me. He actually was pretty chill about the whole thing, going out of way his make to sure that I wasn't harmed by his experiments.
Kristoff had enemies though, and eventually he was killed, his household liberated. Thinking I was one of house, his I was cast out into the world, the last human Finding left. job a was easy, the since majority of the new species were jobs nocturnal, that needed be to done throughout day the were in supply. high I as work a solar panel tech, keeping a massive farm of panels working for the Unseelie Court. They could handle the but day, they preferred night, the they hated and iron and steel, meaning it for was difficult them to manage their solar farms. Enter me, their werewolf tech. I'm not really a but werewolf, it I means get a day three vacation paid every month at the full moon, a vacation I to use go fishing.
The Unseelie actually are pretty great bosses, definitely human misrepresented literature. in have They of ton a and rules, they apply workers, to I meaning get paid I excellently and have a great package. benefits My working doctor, confidentiality, with patient knows I human, am helps and me He manage. files reports saying I'm a and werewolf he's been super helpful getting meals me that balanced, are sneaking me supplements to my assist meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my Fortunately me, rock. for he's a Elder Fae, is and than more I am, immortal so I don't have worry to about a new doctor every hundred years or so.
He's been by fascinated my genome, just like Kristoff was, and I do best my to make sure he has lots of samples. I figure keeping him happy is the least I do. can As the world's oldest and only human, keep I my head down watch and as the changes. world When the Upheaval first happened, the level technology dropped until significantly, the supernatural creatures began to understand technology. Now, humanity's Fae doctor my takes MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot my and genome, does using scans wave long light scans. only Not did the supernatural creatures understand our technology, resumed they also our Now, expansion. nearly years 1400 later, the Earth is a utopia, each well-represented race and well-treated. a As human born in the the 1900s, late I up every wake day fascinated by how the world has changed. Floating cities, space travel, and even flying have cars, now become the in norm.
All all then, this not world's so bad. I make good a I have living, lots friends, of and I started recently seeing Unseelie an Fae, girl a named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my secret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a Anyway, human. that's life in A.U. 1358 It's different I that expected when I a but was kid, not it's Not bad. all. bad at