Dear Diary, I its been know a but while please forgive me. Earlier today when walking home from I school had a strange, the no, strangest thing has that ever happened me to happened today and am I totally out. freaking was crossing Squash Creek I the on bridge north like I do everyday after class. But this time I when approached the on I ramp noticed small a wooden stool sitting in the it path. until wasn't I tried walking it around I did notice the..thing, don't I know to what call it troll a maybe? Yeah, a troll that sense. I makes a today. met troll At first though I was it some creation crude of some meth tweakers of made cats dead and fish then but harry, this scalie thing to turned me and gave a me grin. I was so taken that back fell I on my ass right there. If not I for that would have been of out there the fact and instantly, this that thing started to speak to me.." Easy it there young-en!" said in a disturbingly voice human "Where you off be to in such a I hurry"? Naturally I it. answered spoke back to the "troll", I must been have shock in still. "I was trying to just cross I here, do it day". every almost It was for a silent moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge you now"! "And cross it on my terms". He stuck sort some crooked of cane in my as face started get I to up to feet. my "You my must answer riddle" choked out he with a laugh. was This the point where was I convinced I gone had absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only in aided his "What laughter. time is it when an elephant sits your on fence"? he said a majestic in slow How was voice. I supposed to that? It know was probably some proverb ancient or great I life lesson had never of..I heard tried thing with reasoning but the it wouldn't any. have I had to answer it..otherwise I would have walk to four the to miles other crossing. Yeah right. I sat about for there minutes watching twenty it shoo away flies until I had on an answer. it settled never me what told would happen if wrong in I was my reply...I opened my mouth to speak "What it is time when an elephant on sits fence"? your I repeated. "Its to buy time new fence" a said I confidently. trolls The face showed no emotion until suddenly erupted he in he even laughter, off fell stupid stool. his Was right I I thought to myself. then I that decided while he my mocks answer wrong I wasn't going to I take any ran. that. of I ran fast didn't turn and back. I'm Now recording it all. Should I my tell parents? if What it followed me? Was my answer I'm right? not even sure it happened.. actually