The television and entertainment industries vowed Thursday use to system only their for rating TV programmes and to promised reject by legal -- means, if necessary -- any government-imposed of months plan.
Following a work, group TV of and executives Hollywood are scheduled next to week unveil plans for a system to rate shows based their on suitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will be to similar the 28-year-old system of letters numbers and used by motion-picture the industry and ratings which includes the G, PG-13, PG, R and will NC-17.
"We not use any TV other rating other guidelines than ones the are we to going next announce week," Jack Valenti, said executive chief of the Motion Picture Association America of and head of the group" "implementation the developing parental groups, ratings.
But advocates, children's educators some key and -- lawmakers including Representative Edward Markey, a Democrat Massachusetts have -- demanded group that the include content-based a specifying system the level of sex, violence and language.
Lawmakers bad have ruled not out a fix.
"It legislative is that clear industry the has so far failed to respond adequately the interest to fundamental of in parents the knowing specific content of TV shows in advance," said Markey at a news accompanied conference by lawmakers other and groups pushing for content-based a system the like one used cable now by the HBO channel.
At press a responding conference to Markey, Valenti back. lashed He accused of Markey trying to use government as a "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti not vowed to bend pressure and under alter his group's system.
"We're going not to change word of a it. We're not going to redot or 'i' an a recross Valenti 't,'" said. "If there is by any intervention we're government, going to be court in nanosecond."
The in a Federal Communications Commission also must or reject approve the ratings system. If were it reject to it, agency the could call an for development of alternative plan one -- Valenti that said the would industry the ratings ignore.
Once are in implemented January, Valenti did say the would industry revisit the system after about a year determine to whether it should be changed or "tweaked."
"Is it Of perfect? course All not. subjective systems are ours," flawed. So is Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to six include categories broad -- will not to apply news, news magazine such shows as "60 Minutes" sports. TV or syndicators networks and will issue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and content, to according Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leaked to the include media two children: for "TV-K" for kids suitable and for all and ages; "TV-K7" for children older than seven.
The other four for are: "TV-G" general audiences; "TV-PG," guidance parental suggested; "TV-14" for strongly parents cautioned; and "TV-M" for audiences mature rating are only.
The to be used in with conjunction a "V-chip" installed sets TV in that allow parents to block out shows they too consider violent racy.
The or system, developed HBO in the mid-80s, offers ratings such "MV" as for "mild "SC" violence," for "strong sexual and for content" "AL" language."
But Valenti "adult said system is that unworkable is and too to complicated appear in TV listings in also newspaper.
He the a said 19-member monitoring oversight and will be group created oversee to ratings. the will new It include a chairman and representives from creative of the side the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.