Dyslexia affects children with eyesight normal and intellect in different such an ways, as inability or read to acquire words. or Coaching a specialized educational intervention most may help children with Dyslexia to in perform school. better According to the article, Learning difficulties are of one the consequences many of youngster Dyslexia. A with Dyslexia will have keeping difficulty with up their classmates in most classrooms since is reading a such ability fundamental so in areas. many In the of absence treatment, may lead Dyslexia to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety anger, or as well as detachment from peers and teachers, parents. When and Dyslexia is diagnosed not addressed and throughout childhood, the to it may lead issues long-term The in chances adulthood. of succeeding children in are life they reduced if cannot learn read to and comprehend. author The explains / Attention-Deficit that Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure causing by difficulties in maintaining focus, and hyperactivity, impulsivity. Children Dyslexia with more are likely experience learning challenges to siblings their if and parents suffer from condition.
Furthermore, the same are men than more likely females suffer to from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people all of ages, socioeconomic, ethnic and backgrounds. born Children dyslexia struggle with with understanding, reading, spelling. and article The expands my topic understanding in several ways. I that learned children Dyslexic empathizers; great are many Dyslexia with people have a writing real personality. reading The and difficulties might help with empathize those article’s children struggling. is The strength that it discussed has the and causes effects of Dyslexia with right the age consideration, bracket that is, from age 10. 4 to article’s The weakness that is it the generalized genders specific; without being only again, it mentioned that Dyslexia is more often in male experienced children compared to females explaining the without reasons. race, Concerning is there a sparse of research number papers among children regarding Dyslexia black and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white black children children, than and thus the article children white widely. addresses I use will this article of as capstone part project my public by generating proposal health education on prevent to Dyslexia the public from viewing as Dyslexia a curse.