I lost my in mother the stampede. She was torn my from grasp and carried away in the flow of sweaty, mindless humanity. My nine year old mind could process not this when and I screamed my voice was drowned out by the mashing of and feet the grinding flesh.
For of a few moments I lifted was off feet my between three ladies fat and dragged around kind of in a sadistic like tango, those people on dancing with stars.
I the was to carried the toy isle and spun in around a three then sixty dropped to floor. the A large boot crunched my over There hand. a was sickening as crackle I saw my wrist bend in a way never had It before.
I pulled my arm myself to and horror looked at in my limp and wrist dangly fingers. a For more few moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked in the shins, a by skinny teenager with baggy brown He pants. looked down with his glazed eyes that for a narrowed as second he around stumbled me. He mumbled something his under breath and then was gone in the of shoppers. sea Now my wrist my and ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and screamed, I it was all could I do.
The consumers rushed on right by. I tried to up pushing stand up by from the floor. wrist My bent backwards and my whole arm was slashed with pain. I legs used my and popped up, in just to time bounced get by a large belly shirt that with said a santa been I've good. face Santa's knocked backward me a few steps, but I luckily caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up better than I was, and I tried to fight the crowd the towards exit.
Being pushed and prodded and severely injured, and too short to the see over foaming masses, somehow I ended up in deeper store. the Lost in underwear Shelves the isle. were ripped being clean. A rufus huge erupted few a away, yards and a display with of racks pants and shoes was tipped over. Through the chaos I heard screams agony of and flashes saw of several people pinned under the large shelving units.
I fight couldn't it, I had no control of where I and went, the crowd carried me to closer the There accident. was blood floor on and the twitching a black man's arm swatted leg my from under a massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked away the from and scene, actually a spotted small break in the crowd, ran through I the opening, headed toward the big exit red is that sign about only thirty yards suddenly away, but my progress was halted the by closing in of human bodies. I'm stuck. A T.V. being smashed carried into my wrist and I was suddenly tears in from the pain, and confusion hysteria.
Suddenly shotgun a echoed blast across the store. another. Then The crowd was quieter for a moment, swarming the and buzzing slowed down and everything seemed still. almost about For a half second. Then the screaming started. I to was pushed ground the and a woman fell on of top People me. were on stepping of both us running for the running exit, for the back, running each into other in My screamed chaos. wrist my in were pain, ribs probably broken, and was I pinned under who this woman now was unconscious.
The last thing I saw was a coming boot down on my face.