The article represents overview an of methodologies on literature other criteria and in used supplier evaluation and selection process, believed which is to be one of components the vital successful of a operation a manufacturing of company. particular, paper the In emphasized the in field change industry’s this – from primarily focusing on embracing operational efficiency the to potential partnerships. of The strategic article claims that the right approach thus, supplier to assessment, is the company’s key to a development and progress.
The starts paper with to various address ways the related issues MCDM to of suppliers’ selection. most common The ones are to stated be models, mathematical Simple rating multi-attribute technique network (SMART), analytic analytic process (ANP), hierarchy process data (AHP), (DEA), envelopment linear analysis programming, and others. some example, For DEA is a focused methodology on system a supplier and classifies as it either inefficient efficient selecting or based particular criteria. on models Mathematical programming usually complex incorporate evaluations between allowing one suppliers, compare to them and identify the most optimal in of cost terms other and criteria.
The further article compares all their methodologies by popularity expressed in of the frequency in mentions literature. the Thus, DEA is the most approach common with mentions, 30% whereas mathematical programming (15%), (17%), AHP and account case-based reasoning mentions. fewer for However, those represent methodologies largest the share of all approaches.
The MCDM article the of highlights knowing significance this distribution, which idea can build an of the ways prominent most to address the issues with suppliers’ selection. assessment and It also is stated suppliers that should be evaluated based on inputs “the of the strategic, functional operational and (Agarwal levels” al., 2011). Methodologies et DEA, as mathematical programming, such or advised AHP be are to for the used most identifying suppliers, optimal whereas AHP is to noted be effective in providing consistency.