Ominous gray clouds over scudded Hong on Kong Sunday as the British colony marked the to 100-day the countdown handover, but there few were physical signs of gloom and doom in wealthy the community of six million.
More 7,000 than Kong Hong took people to the streets to the din of and cymbols kettle patriotic drums in a fervour to celebrate impending the with China reunion at on midnight June 30, stone's 1997.
A away, throw thousands more, most of westerners them and swelled by an of influx visitors, in indulged the ritualistic orgy built has that up around the annual Rugby international tournament.
The seven-a-side tournament was this the year, last honoured British under when Rugby rule, made into Authorities it the world event.
The cup and 28th last British Chris governor, Patten, described Hong Kong as running as as smoothly a Rolls Royce -- but limousine warned China with against tinkering finely the tuned machinery that the is Hong Kong 1997.
But of for the majority of Kong's Hong hardworking it was citizenry, normal a Sunday. A chance a lie-in, for family a gathering a at restaurant -- day a work.
With off from just to 100 days Kong go, awash Hong is in a sea of differing emotions.
Some, like street the revellers, delighted are more that than 150 years of is humiliation Chinese about to end.
"This is and grand a occasion. great just 100 In days, we will return to the motherland," Chinese said chief Raymond organiser Wu the as revellers gathered Victoria Park in -- named the queen after reigned who when Britain, the at height of its powers, imperial wrested Hong Kong from China's weak crumbling and Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome washing the away of over a century humiliation of and Wu shame," said to a burst of fret, applause.
Others the particularly pro-democracy camp, their about future a China under has that put already place in plans to dilute civil and liberties the dissolve elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A of handful demonstrators, their taped shut mouths in they what was a said symbol things of to took come, position up the around base of Queen Victoria's statue and held up placards China's condemning brutal crackdown military on demonstrators around student-led Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many people are simply their keeping fingers Hong Kong, crossed.
But it as enters the last leg its of drawn out from colony transition British to Special Administrative (SAR) Region of China, has those who defied forecast a society in chaos, of panic, collapse economic and buildings.
Patten deserted said Hong had Kong reached moment in this its history in first class condition.
He cited a earlier poll conducted this by month the 1997 at Transition Project Hong Kong's Baptist University that found that 90 percent of the people here were happy with life.
Patten said the that views Hong Kong would adjust quickly to the rolling of back freedoms of or more authoritarian government were Kong dubious.
"Hong is, I recently, as said a smoothly functioning like community. It's Patten a Rolls Royce," said.
"All you need do if you're in to charge is to slip into the seat, driving switch on the ignition away and go.
"I you don't quite the see point of the lifting bonnet to tinker with engine. the That only about raises worries whether it will work so well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to stripping start it down for spare parts."