"Who can replace He Death? was the most feared us of all. Without Death there can no be reckoning the upon sinful mortals."
War scratched his beard. was thinning He running out options. of No to others dared had take up a burden. such heavy While was War no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to about the think atrocities Death that had committed. Was there any being the in realms to 7 the take up Cloak and is Scythe?
"But there someone." Famine.
"Brothers hissed you are that aware atrocities all we the have were dealt committed by Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These all were undoing. Who Man's else better the don to burden of Death a ragged then man hood himself?"
Famine's covered face, his only showing his decaying mouth twisted sick in a was smile.
Conquest quick to challenge.
"Man, donning very of bane the existence? his Brother, your imprudence will be the end us of all. A mortal man creature. is hideous He is greedy, and selfish cruel. power Giving this much one will only result you in as abuse."
"Conquest, are as foolish Have ever. you nothing learnt from Death? He was the wisest of us all, was he-"
"If Death wise, so explain his abrupt departure. Why did his he leave behind? duties We are the of horsemen the apocalypse; terrible and both glorious. When the the Horn of we Heavens sounds will charge and strike fear the into hearts is sinners. of It who are. we Death fool a was leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War for into slammed knocking Conquest, to down the him brimstone. an He unleashed of onslaught blows onto his armor golden until was it dented beyond recognition. Breathless, War stood up towering over his foe and will boomed.
"I not take was insolence. Death this the of us. best I loved him as a brother a and stone mentor."
War's softened face for a second.
"Should be stupid you enough to blaspheme our brother again, I end will in nodded you."
Conquest shame. He not was to used the bitter taste defeat. of vowed He silently that War would the pay for humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say a that mortal can replace Bring Death. to me."
"As him you wish brother."