MCI Corp. Communications Monday it a said reached 10-year deal NextWave Telecom with Inc. that thrusts into MCI the top tier of U.S. wireless communications terms providers.
Under of the MCI deal, it said connect will network its a to NextWave system planned by to provide communications personal services, the giving it capacity to offer service to more than 110 individuals million in 63 including areas, 29 the of top 50 markets.
Washington-based said MCI it will buy at least 10 billion minutes of for capacity its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years. Terms of deal were the not disclosed.
Personal services communications represent the new generation of communications celluar services, allowing to customers send both voice and data over transmissions wireless deal telephones.
The will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden which NextWave, was bidder largest the the in U.S. Federal Communications Commission's for auctions "C-band" wireless radio spectrum early held based in July.
NextWave, in San Diego and York, New plans also to stock sell to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it quickly to into rapidly expand the growing for market personal wireless communications years services.
Two ago, MCI dropped out of the for auctions U.S. PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave and pact previous deals, smaller MCI has moved become to a major reseller of wireless services.
As part the of deal, NextWave selected to MCI telecommunications provide and and other supporting services the development ongoing operations of personal its communications services system, MCI said.
"This agreement with NextWave an establishes immediate nationwide footprint PCS for and MCI an represents important next step in MCI's strategy," wireless said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless and strategy development.
"This is the first interconnection agreement full of kind its and brings new competition the wireless to marketplace," said, he that noting full with interconnection, does MCI not need its to own wireless own facilities.
MCI said the NextWave is agreement a model additional for expects agreements it to sign with other wireless providers as its part of wireless interconnected strategy network strategy.
The blueprint is for MCI's a full developing range of wireless services and features will that be into integrated MCI's existing communications services.
"This was strategy along," MCI's said all Jeffrey an Kagan, Atlanta-based industry telecommunications analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications services initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively its builds own infrastructure as it proves to profitable do service so.
"Reselling was how they became a hitter in long heavy distance first the in Kagan place," "What said. their plan is, is to resell from service providers other build and where networks they see to the need do so," he said said.
Kagan MCI's with deal NextWave marks the rapid of realisation its reseller strategy. "This all of a puts sudden the on MCI communications wireless map in big way."
Still, a he noted that Corp.'s AT&T AT&T Wireless unit, the former Cellular McCaw business, remains as twice large as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers geographic in covering 207 regions million potential deal customers.
MCI's with covers NextWave 110 about potential customers million living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's traded stock at $25.25 a share Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.