I I knew could not cook, I but did sweat not it. door The rang, bell and I was so excited. I the opened and let my door two gooey one eyed companions in. They were so glad they did that not notice even my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine now. All two alien mine
The awoke "gourmet" to jellybeans. They themselves, stuffed those crude commented blobs. idiotic Smiling they on how strange human customs That were. was quite funny, what considering I really planned. had I at laughed weeks them.
Three they later, were still strapped their to places woke and ate, up, then slept. Jellybeans were their waking every They hour. jellybeans lived loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans.
On ninth their week they I realized doing, what was but were they I powerless. laughed at them as I broke their hinges. jaw Now they complain, can't so all was wondrous next again.
By the they week went on jellybean a strike, I but that knew would not last long, considering attached how the to food they were.
I broke their jaws, their life, their They will. were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companions so entertaining. were But little the trick was starting to get old. grew I tired, so decided I spice to things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told them to the only way get their food was to beat one up. another would The eat. winner However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I off sawed then each of their four legs. I then let at them other. They each sprang animals, like biting punching each other. It was a slow process, them having no legs and little energy. it that But made all more the worth while. I was even kind of sad when finally weaker the of the two was knocked I out. knew I needed more. So things then, I spiced up again. told I the still conscience barely one in that order to get his meal he would have his to best kill alien He friend. was shocked. I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder for him I slowly. handed the syringe filled black with licorice the alien. to victorious The loser alien then woke up, only awake enough to see his friend own the inject deadly dose of jelly beans his into body. He died shortly, but boy was massively it entertaining.
The alien was that still alive cried, making noise inaudible his for jaw broken was after He all. demanded his jelly beans. It not was enough. polite attitude was His simply unacceptable. I So kicked him in gut. the threw I him against the wall and told to him HE be polite. WAS KNOCKED THEN OUT. HE COULD NOT PERFORM OF TASK THE ASKING HE NICELY. HAD BE TO AT KILLED ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL did MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy I love experience. that But I would not it. miss was It a lot of work. are costly Jellybeans after all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every tasted bite. Alien flesh so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I not could cook I knew not well, to sweat it from the plan beginning. My had been a great success after all.
Did I write BookWyrm17? it correctly What you about do think it? I think did it well!
r/jesuschristreddit I pretty