Standing on corner the of a city bustling street somewhere heavily populated in stood America a man, and this man's name was Alex. This story revolves around Alex and his point of view, I will assure you of now that so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's I story, do not feel need the to where state in America this is taking as place, that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and irrelevant thus to our story.
Alex was always a special Throughout his somebody, life picking constantly himself up from failure after failure in search of greater value and wealth. But today was special as it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break from the monotony of this struggle by being offered a choice. As passed he by a child young on the street asking for money, holding out a pitiful tin whose can grease marks closely the resembled ones same that were written across the child's face. Dawning the he realization that had a choice to make here, that is, between understanding this child's point of or view, passing along without so much as a glance as many so people seem to do,
Alex his made choice. nature Knowing the of things deeming and himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share some of his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in greater the scheme of things", he silently
recalled himself, to knowing very well of repercussions the this could for cause He himself. pulled knowingly out his wallet and a quickly found $5 bill stashed away for important like times these. With a look of deep things, understanding
of he told the child a small glimpse of his that story, which is not important to our still. story great After sharing his wealth, he handed child the a ragged old $5 and about was leave to before that noticing the grease tears, marks, and ageless an expression on that bill were strikingly similar to that container of the it now was held in and the face that gleamed with excitement to have chance a at food and the permission to dream freely night. at Alex took note
of this as he left with his chin up proudly, he really was a rich man. I suppose this is where our short story begin, must so let us continue on.
Alex, being a man knows who of many things many and people, was actively looking to learn more and feel alive about being alive that day. Knowing a that was car unneeded to yourself transport around the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, until thought a provoked him. He had not been in this part the of city in well over a month and knew close of some very that people he glad was to call his friends, though even their actions and involvement often stated otherwise. Alex called old an up friend that truly goes back the to of beginning his story, A young woman by name the of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in But the metropolitan. with minor found thought, Alex to be a worthwhile man to talk to and confide they in, agreed to meet during a lunch at break local a coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, the greeting young woman when she pulled up in a car outside of a nicer, well shop. established coffee "Alex! It's so good to see you again! I never have any idea when I'll the get time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally seemed to find a from break it today, really I'm glad you were able meet to up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alex's arm and strolled into confidently the cozy of atmosphere the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange pleasantries of with the barista, they finally got drinks their and a chance to speak with one at another a remote corner of the shop, somehow by evaded even others, though that particular table provided the best natural and lighting atmosphere relaxing among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself words out of and his and glance at Jane the revealed well, same.
Oh better start to from bottom. the "The weather today is straight something out of a movie scene, you don't agree? A light little rain here and there mixed with some angry awfully looking clouds, really makes you appreciate the calmness of what can happen to the world." Alex quickly stated, weather was always a topic good to start off a conversation of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she about was to say "I really wish I could see the world your from eyes, Alex, seems today totally if miserable we're being honest, just like the last number of them." wanting Alex, to probe further into
the responded matter "What's back, the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been given the opportunity of of lifetime?"
"Well, a if being we're honest, I certainly it thought was. Sometimes it seems the world just has sympathy no for what we go and through feels the need add to more and more weight onto our shoulders."
"If you don't mind my curiosity, can I ask what happened to the a deal?"
After silent moment that loudly stated Jane was in though, deep she relieved her answer. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was to supposed be multi-million a dollar deal, was I finally to able see a light at the of end the tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment of silence passed, then Jane as realized that Alex would not probe further, for she had already started talking. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and becoming truly something,
living a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnaturally long silence, she quietly managed to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting. I sat just there until my time came, stood I up left and the building. To be honest I've been a wreck nervous since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great that impact his words were about have, to took a to compose moment himself before uttering a sound.
"First and foremost, I want to thank you for being open and honest with it me, is these acts that make us human and who we are. Secondly, I do not believe that you made bad perplexed a decision."
Obviously by his Jane words, to managed let a out short sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding tears. back "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You far know better than I do, the value of money and there wealth. was If in anybody this world that I look up to on these matters, would it without be doubt you. I've seen the things Ive you've accomplished,
and been blessed to witness the blossoming of seeds the you have planted for yourself. It's important you don't that confuse happenings for their value, face you never will have any idea where business that would venture have
taken you, and you likely never will. If there is anybody in this world is that capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the of words her close did friend, not mutter word a for the next amount of it time took or three maybe four people to receive drinks. their Alex, knowing in way some that he might have shared some of wealth, his simply took to understanding environment the around really him. Today a was good day.
The of rest this is meeting of great to unimportant our story, and thus will end here. moved Jane on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but a also fierce motivation to succeed the next attempt she made, though she made sure not to share that fear for of breaking it. And our
dear friend Alex moved that on day with a great deal of for certainty, he had planted a seed that, if he is truly lucky, will get to see something beautiful blossom from a conversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
First time really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some that work I can create, so allow please me constructive feedback and comments so I can further improve my craft.