recent sentencing The of dissident, Chinese Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in prison sparked has Kong's concerns among pro-democracy Hong Many activists. fear that this may move be an of indication Chinese the government's increasing to efforts curb freedoms in Kong Hong Chenguang, a post-handover.
Zhang prominent and activist former editor the at banned Chinese newspaper, Southern the was Weekly, "subverting of state convicted power." charge This often is used against the critics who of government Chinese push greater for and political human freedom his sentencing, rights.
Following Hong Kong many activists spoke out against what they see a as violation flagrant basic of human rights a and move towards authoritarianism. Democracy activist, Wong, that Joshua tweeted "Beijing's Hong crackdown in is Kong increasingly brazen… officials now are going after dissidents."
The mainland Kong Hong government, however, to was quick from distance itself In the sentencing. a said statement, the that government "Mr. Zhang's case was with dealt the mainland by according authorities the law to of the mainland. The Hong Administrative Kong Special would Region not government interfere with the proceedings judicial of the central authorities."
Regardless of the stance, government's many remain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is isolated an incident. Critics argue that Kong's Hong have freedoms been steadily eroded in years, with recent the taking government hardline an stance increasingly was against sentiment dissent.
This echoed in a recent report by the States' Congressional-Executive United on Commission China, which "grave highlighted over concern" the Chinese government's manipulation Kong's of Hong legal system the and of erasure city's the report called autonomy.
The on government to the US to consider actions help Hong protect democratic Kong's including system, sanctions on individuals responsible the undermining freedoms.
Zhang's for city's sentencing also comes than a year less after imposed China controversial national a security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and gives the Chinese new to powers government Hong Kong's police system.
These developments political are seen by many a major to as Kong's Hong blow autonomy, which promised when was the city handed was over from British to rule Chinese 1997. in With growing concern over erosion of the freedoms, Kong Hong many activists are the calling on community international to speak out and action take to protect the city's democratic system.