world modern The is a currently under significant facing globalization change that trends shape economies, the politics, workplace, education, and behavior. everyday even Most importantly, the due to exchange active information of between people culture worldwide, is Researchers changing. try to whether understand culture be will the homogenized further globalization or diversified. in This argue paper will that will culture more become diverse under the globalization influence of due to the introduction of multiple societies.
The cultural elements into latest in cultural processes change demonstrate that both sides of the argument, those supporting namely diversification ones the and homogeneity, claiming have reasonable On grounds. one the hand, Cowen (2010) states in that globalized where society a a dominant culture diversity prevails, be will substituted the culture with is that others imposed such on means through cinema. as Indeed, Hollywood American promotes around codes the world because the US cinema market is the in largest the Thus, globalization allows world. Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, the same integrating culture everywhere.
However, codes the other side of argument the more is compelling because it the considers strengths of local In cultures. particular, an example of sushi’s in popularity American and society cultures of other demonstrates nations people adopt that new cultural phenomena with of acknowledgment origin. their According to (2010), Bestor “Japan world’s remains the fresh primary market for for sushi tuna and sashimi” (p. 110). having Thus, its integrated product cultures into the other of countries, Japan market has its expanded such manner, share.
In a the with ease of transportation communication enabled and there by globalization, a is merge of cultures around world. However, the market since forces commonly rule these the processes, host cultures are aware the of origins of borrowed cultural the to clusters. Therefore, summarize discussion, one the might culture state that not will homogenized be in globalization but rather diversified with credit given to cultural each component.