The whole field astrophysics of and in astronomy, general, quite is perplexing. The and rich discoveries significant history made by well-known paved way scientists for the the technological of revolutions 20th 21st the centuries. and However, distinct discoveries these would have not been made without equipment. The article The the telescope in century seventeenth written Albert by Helden, Van sheds light on device the its and significant importance in the history of astronomy.
In this article, the author made strong several arguments. In the he indicates beginning, that the telescope against was used enemies the as instrument. a terrestrial However, with advancement the multiple the and improvements to the lense, writer that indicates the telescope to started be to applied magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope made that the in difference science, and is it the main reason why astronomers the encouraged telescope-makers to work on lenses (Van Helden I agree 1974). the telescope that can be the conduit of information astronomers, for and with help, its can they gather new make data and new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the source only of such achieving significant in results the as astronomy.
Consequently, has been mentioned Van by Helden, methods of encouragement different of telescope makers used. were also There are other sciences that to contribute development of the engineering. example, For and physics chemistry on focus appliance of the pressure, about knowledge and forces, chemicals and their The combination. most recent might developments the include development technologies of like new phones or motors modern for while Moreover, vehicles. advancements the have been so big, are there no fields of engineering which are prohibited. developments might Specific be if prohibited they jeopardize health or the lives of people. The of activity therefore, is, engineering controlled laws.
Hence, by special of the development and telescopes improvement the of the gave lenses an to impetus the advances in astronomy. While telescope the first used was as terrestrial a it soon tool, became astronomers’ tool. With the help of and telescope-makers developments of it was lenses, make to possible discoveries. However, kinds of other sciences, as such physics and chemistry, the contribute technological to advancements While time. our of are there no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful jeopardize the to health lives or of people.