The stark chords Tosca of begin again; once Scarpia's is the motive first thing the audience at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they jaded are by it, it but still within me elicits feelings from a bygone Soon life. we'll see entrances Cavaradossi from and of course our leading lady, Tosca, forced the do and to unspeakable one murder man to try and save another's life. Poor if Tosca; only she had known that Cavaradossi was truly given stay a execution, of perhaps she have accepted would Scarpia's demand for people intimacy.
The then will shuffle of out the theatre, opera critiquing lazily the show same they've that seen entirely too here in often and go Milan, to out the cafés and restaurants that they've times to been before. Their many lives, seemingly on a loop, continue at their leisurely pace as I sit by in my darkened above villa the streets the watching by.
Acquaintances days pass of mine always asked, move "Why to Milan?" don't "You know do Italian, you?" "Why they'd now?" ask with all the sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day I'm card. not sure that ever have an I'd answer for them, because they were right question my to motives. Why choose to fundamentally eternal the change the workings of lifestyle?
For vampiric Milanese one, the choose to stay the out until of hours ungodly 1 2 or o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food usually is the spiked residual with Lombardy from alcohol region their chardonnay and bianco pinot by the pint. However, even getting past the eternal hangover that is life, my how do avoid I that vegetable villainous that the Italians seem to put dish: every in garlic.
Oh the dreaded For aglio. so often took I for granted it time during my in Vienna. Stakes could easily be enough avoided good with planning (an internally locked coffin with plenty between face reinforced of steel my and world the that might wish to destroy but me), the never Austrians bothered with garlic quite as as often they do here.
Perhaps might go I back to Vienna and simple dine off people the whose beer is consumption admirable as much as it shameful. is I Perhaps will get back hearing to Strauss operas and the of Mozart, or maybe the occasional of performance Marschner's Vampyr." But "Der now, for sit like I Tosca, in I a place should never wish to for waiting be the right moment to make my escape and free be Now, this again. sleeping never of city Milan holds hostage me with the taste of death lips. on everyone's