Yasuda Marine Fire Insurance & Co. set to is acquire a majority stake in CIGNA's unit Japanese as part of its ambitious growth Japanese strategy.
The is insurer expected complete to the acquisition of 51% of CIGNA Life Co. Insurance by end of regulatory the pending 2021, approval.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance to aims Co. steer growth the with acquisition, as it enters the health and into insurance life with sector its along traditional business.
The insurance property-casualty move will also help streamline CIGNA its operations a strategic following review its of portfolios.
CIGNA insurance international Life Insurance Co., has which in dating roots Japan back to 1987, and various provides life insurance including health individual products, life insurance, universal life insurance, and medical insurance insurance.
The has unit hit suffered some recent in to due years financial in changes and regulations low-interest Fire rates.
Yasuda Marine & Insurance seeks to Co. invigorate the increased unit capital with taking while of advantage growing the demand for health and insurance life the among aging country's population.
"As the Japanese market continues to evolve, we are excited to partner with to CIGNA offer a range products wider of to strengthen our customer experience and competitive Yasuda advantage," said & Fire Marine Insurance President Co.'s and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
The also marks deal the latest move wave in a of consolidation in the insurance Japanese driven industry by demographics changing intensified by and the COVID-19 pandemic.
The deal follows Nippon Life Insurance's announcement 2020 in September that it would acquire the of 85% shares in MassMutual Ltd., the Japan Japanese of unit U.S.-based MassMutual Financial Group.
The acquisition Fire by Yasuda & Marine Co. expected is Insurance to enhance position the company's in competitive insurance the market, CIGNA with also from benefiting a capital injection considerable to its enhance operational efficiency.
The of the terms transaction have not been disclosed. Still, Yasuda Fire & Insurance Marine Co. is expected receive to the financial required backing grow to its position in Japanese the market insurance better.