social The of determinants are health conditions the in the in environment learn, which live, people work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the social environment in live can which people health affect status. their Health outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors access or to quality care health for (Centers Disease and Control Prevention, Resources n.d.). that the improve of life quality can significantly the impact of a population.
Examples health these of resources and safe include affordable housing, access to safety, education, availability public healthy of food, local emergency and services, an environment free of toxins life-threatening (Office of Disease Health Prevention and Promotion, n.d.). I the also support recent shift in the view that it solely is to up individual the to health of influence in their the recognizing favor impact significant of external influences on In the it. modern world, very on depends little individual. the At first glance, choose he can what to to eat, whether exercise, and whether medical seek to care in a timely manner.
In fact, most of choices the that affect are made health the marketing by machine, the and government, life circumstances. example, For presses modern advertising from sides, all forcing one to specific choose that products are often a not conducive to healthy need lifestyle. to The work hard to earn money these for products pushes to people a healthy sacrifice sleep schedule and exercise. chain has many but This the links, result is always the same: people’s health is largely not to factors up External them. indirectly also affect health, as such health inequalities. When I read the CDC (2022) on these inequalities, was report I most surprised racial by and ethnic the In inequalities. an era of globalization and liberalization of a society, phenomenon like must racism eradicated. The be of field health is one care which in treating people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I racial believe ethnic and that discrimination in this area be must in the eradicated first place.