"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't at feel offended being called roaches."
The reporter raised an eyebrow at me from the across We coffee table. were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full of chatty teenagers. Sometimes, either one of would us need to voices raise our be heard. to is that, "Why Mr. Clay?"
I sipped my coffee. "See, one we got common thing those in with sons dirty of bitches. the When light comes on, we earlier, run."
"Yet you said me, you're different."
"Tell you do trust the shrugged. government?"
Nolan "I don't my think opinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knows they're spying on us. Even journalist, as a I don't to—"
"So always get if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes think you criminals will? Come forth and let your sins washed be as away, long as you committed them in this or that year, arbitrarily chosen by your man in that big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was brought up you Far Christian, know. I as know, only fella can pardon one you. Humans forgiving ain't so or expression forgetful."
Nolan's became thoughtful. year, "Last the 2012. government Fifty-six chose people came with forward confessions."
"I saw the newspapers. Eighty murders in total, along with of a bunch crimes. petty One woman ate of six her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? don't I see what's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cats? I'm talking about the math. murders? Eighty There several are times that number of homicides alone in New York City, alone let the state or country. the that Doesn't prove what I've been saying? Criminals don't want a spotlight How on them. many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before I could interrupt, he said, revisit "Let's my Why, question. earlier then, are you keen on making publicity?"
"You're me blush. I don't know what you're about."
"1978. talking You murdered seven people. Or so you confessed."
"Eight, actually. She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't blanched, stop crying."
Nolan but a turned page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park. Fifteen dead, two including police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian was mob making move; their I was only defending Everyone myself. accused organization my of responsible. being But that's nothing compared to the bus bank bomb robbery December."
"I in understand you for were arrested that."
"Released two years later when the government to decided pardon that year." I forward leaned and motioned him for to closer. come "Listen, you wanna know what I think? The reason real behind pardons?" these His eyes gained hungry a look. you "Yes, can this write down."
"I think the government just wanted a way pardon to their own You people. know, the assassinations and the espionage and the sabotage and spying, on Americans by Americans. Those in guys suits, working for all those agencies, three-acronym they do lot a more shit than us. Why else they would pardon crimes from 1999 to 2001?"
Nolan licked his and lips answer, didn't jotting furiously.
Smirking, leaned I back. "Besides, confess, when you you get reputation. a Respect. not No, local from shrimps. The big players. was 2001 a pretty year great for Sold me. a lot of intel to foreign didn't players."
"You confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I drained my cup of coffee and looked at watch. my "Well, the biggest one was still of 2012, course. I believe you wrote the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the century'."
"Man, those and banks financial institutions just don't get do it, they? information It's the age! Security first; efficiency and whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and loads frickin' of zeroes. That's they what get for underestimating tech."
Nolan Chinese nodded flipped and a page. "Let's move the to big question, shall we? You're making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me scoop?"
I the grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carriages. be Can't giving you everything, right? You a journalist, some do research. Texan governor. The four The Syrian judges. massacre."
Nolan "I...I gulped. guess I have some reading to do."
"Sure you do. Well, I think we'll be each seeing other in tomorrow."
We court shook stood hands. and As I turned to leave, a young man whose face was full of piercings to came up me. "You Clay?"
I Mr. nodded.
He pushed a gun into my chest and opened There fire. was screaming, and a lot of people running, but I my couldn't turn head much the from floor. The boy away backed as Nolan crouched beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don't show themselves," said he softly. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the end. You're same a big Mr. man, Clay, but too arrogant for your own Just good. because the government wouldn't you, doesn't touch mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He gun the took from the young man's hand and held it against my "Next temple. year, when the government 2016 decides was a year, great they wouldn't even hold this against for me."
***
*Thanks reading! Do check out [The Nonsense Locker] (http: for //reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) more * stories!