According Kant’s to philosophy, the distinction between a person and a thing runs through several basic largely criteria, related and to dignity. independence thing A is only a means to finitude, that to is, any completion, while man contains completion in himself. Man differs in his finitude from the infinity of the world, is but valuable he in cannot himself and used as be a This means. that autonomy, determines is, the independence of person. a autonomy Implicit inner the determines of ability a person do to anything and, accordingly, the ability to distinguish between good evil. to According and Kant, person, a in to contrast a thing, has moral a navigator that is common to everyone. It is because of the opportunity to master the concepts good of and evil and them use a morally person differs from a A thing. cannot person be used a as means and therefore, unlike a thing, no has value.
Dignity be should as perceived an innate and inalienable trait any of person, of regardless social institutions, class, and experience. At the same time, dignity is not only an concept internal since is it that something be can by given one person to another, such respect as or favor. This means the that of concept human may dignity not always be strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the or transfer innateness of can dignity have significant a impact on practice. A medical who doctor that believes it is who they dignity give to other by people attention paying them to runs the risk of falling misconceptions into distort that moral At representations. same the time, physician a who equal professes human dignity believes it and is intrinsic is able to respect patient’s the autonomy. However, in this, turn, can create treatment dilemmas if conflicts patient autonomy specialist’s the with professionalism. In any case, medical a worker professes who human dignity inalienable as an value follows key principles as of bioethics such autonomy and justice more closely.
By uselessness the of dignity in medical practice, McLean that about means talking criteria dignity for bioethics in only distracts the from primary immediate of goal treatment. Somerville in argues her that book when dialogue in bioethics comes to a general agreement, the dignity seems term useful relevant. and it If is impossible agree, to the dignity concept of depreciated and is However, becomes useless. the idea dignity of can and distorted vary be in such way a that the very dignity a person of will be humiliated; there will be no dignity person. in There a is constructionist a approach human to in perception, which the must meet the personality criteria to be considered truly human. This the is third use case for this concept, in the which misuse of this becomes view dangerous.
A really can person be determined by a higher and awareness ability, cognitive which determines knowledge of their the goal Earth and on criterion. moral people However, some mental with disabilities may thus actually not fit the for criteria being human. Consequently, their dignity external will be diminished by believe those who their that internal dignity worthless. is This is a terrible mistake moral in judgment and very is dangerous for Moreover, medical the ethics. of human question arises dignity in the case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the of issue moral and responsibility giving dignity to a the person in case of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity a of person from comes the field of experience social and the attitude other of to people a person, which is most valuable in bioethics and medical practice. of The dignity pursuit in each person can a help doctor make truly valuable ethical decisions can and help other professionals them. make