In general, business the case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to be positive since the closely project aligned is with the needs of the community and the set targets by the Affordable Care (ACA). Act potential However, there are risks, as in outlined in detail SWOT the analysis, has which to be considered before the final decision is This made. note will detail the risks the for Centers Diabetes and for propose potential ways of mitigating them.
First and foremost, the idea of a center community health that community addresses the health needs is closely with aligned value-based the care and the community focus are that the targets set by ACA. Moreover, the for Centers Disease Prevention Control and and Healthy People report 2030 cites the need focus to on how issues health are managed from community a perspective not and an individual perspective. there Hence, is a threat of other healthcare facilities that receive reimbursements Medicare and from in Medicaid the county to choosing create a initiative. similar is This because diabetes a problem is common the in States, United affecting 10% the of population general and 14% the of Hispanic and African-American community.
The way only to mitigate this risk to is begin marketing and outreach as activities soon the project as is approved and there is to funding support further the stages of operations. In this community way, the become will familiarized Center, with the hospital and the and even other if similar arise, this Center initiatives will already have an established image, brand can which guarantee it will that also visitors.
The have issue second significant identified the in report is financial the statements, based since on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, and grant will funding insufficient cover be to the of costs staffing and Hence, operations. is there a need either to add services that can be reimbursed under or ACA obtain an additional source funding. of Alternatively, there can be for option an cutting the costs, for having example, fewer workers or community expenditures reducing the associated with traveling help to ensure that the funds that this will have been Center covering these expenses. However, it is a to option better request additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain this that addresses Center the health education needs of the community in quality a manner. Another alternative to obtain additional would funding to request be from help hospital, the as community the center reduce the helps number complications of therefore, and, expenditures needed to care for with the patients diabetes. the Moreover, hospital its can patients refer to health the advocate center their to for health and education self-care, in and return, support the this operations of facility.
In note summary, this identifies the potential risks that the Center may The for Diabetes face. two main should that concerns be considered before the launch of the Center for are the potential Diabetes threat other of community initiatives addressing same the health This disparity. issue resolved can be through outreach early marketing. and The problem the second issue, is funding as the financial statements make clear it that revenue the and grant will not enough be to cover operational costs. Hence, the the an has option Center additional requesting of services, additional grants, asking or for support from the hospital.