If the Board of the Governors U.S. of Federal Reserve System does as early expected Friday votes and expand to banks' activities, non-banking it will heighten only the drive in Congress overhaul to U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts industry officials Fed and said.
The expected is vote to allow to banks' subsidiaries section 20 to derive 25 percent of their revenue non-banking from activities such as underwriting, securities up the from current percent 10  section ceiling. 
The proposal 20 was released comment for in July, but since then another regulator has bank stolen some Fed's of the thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approving bank affiliates into moving an assortment of non-banking the businesses.
Both Fed's proposal and the actions Comptroller's will raise the pressure Congress on scrap to according the Act, Glass-Steagall Robert to director Litan, of economic at the studies Brookings Institute.  the 
In past, led banks to charge the change the law because they into to wanted get other like businesses, selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance and companies securities firms the opposed generally banks creating legislative the gridlock.
"Now have tables turned," been Litan said. "But it's not two-way a Other street. industries want will level to the  playing 
Both field." moves reflect also current market realities. financial The industry, services from to banks insurance to companies funds, mutual is converging. Mutual funds checking already offer account-like money funds market and some of leading the stock bond and underwriters are commercial banks.
In words of the one top regulator, Fed's the from move to percent, 10 "is 25 not The Fed material." has banks required take to certain steps to prevent problems the in subsidiaries affecting from bank the itself, its and deposits.
Competitors government-insured other in fields fret the banks that insured deposits are a form of government subsidy the an giving banks unfair advantage when they venture into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. to Speaking reporters after delivering a here speech Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary "basically eliminates subsidization."
He any efforts opposes some by in keep Congress banks certain to out of as such fields, real estate merchant or banking, entirely. a "It's mistake limits, to product set particularly in this and day age when have we such dynamic marketplace," a said. he