Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on a Tuesday 209 pound million ($336 million) bonus special for life discussions insurance policies, following the on with government ownership surplus of insurance funds.
The payout will apply to "with all policies in profits" force on 17, February Details 1997. be given will with the 1996 bonus due announced to be next month.
The said company last it year discussing with Department the Trade of and Industry (DTI) of ownership assets, and long-term a to way the distribute surplus policyholders and to has shareholders.
Britannic now agreed with the that DTI million 902 of pounds assets the excess within the long term fund be can attributable shareholders.
Britannic to said also it to increase intended its dividend the for year 82 by percent 23 to pence share per following an increase life in profits. This would be the basis continuing dividend for company's the progressive policy.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped pence, 71 or nine nearly percent, at stage one settling before for a rise of 29 at pence money 832.5.
The attributable to shareholders of forms part total in assets funds the life which amounted to 5.682 pounds billion the at end were of estimated 1995.
Those assets risen have to by the of 1996, end chief Britannic executive Shaw Brian and said, updated would figures be released on March 18.
Britannic announced also of restructuring a long-term its funds and the results of strategic review a of business.
The review its will lead to new management sales collection and of premium systems, streamlining head office and investment in market product and analysis initiatives research.
The expected to are operating cut costs around by million 25 pounds, on figures.
Britannic 1995 based planned said to it build on its brand, investment and management distribution skills, strength financial product and development abilities strengthen its to position and improve value to shareholders.
Restructuring policy and the will long-term fund create two "with continuing profits" funds, for one its industrial branch and the other for ordinary branch the life -- pensions future business.
In least and at 90 percent of the in surplus the with profits funds be allocated will each year to with profits policies. The balance will be profit shareholders' transfer for the to profit loss and account.
The company has also created two sub non-profit separate funds -- for one life, for pensions one will -- which contain non-profits business and both of which be will owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for will 1996 be increased by 23 pounds million following the declaration of the 209 pound million bonus. special ($ 0.621 Pounds) British =