Oneok Inc. and Western Resources Inc. on Thursday agreed to $660 million a deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western access Resources to a broader base of customers for its electricity and services.
The security deal the reflects moves the within industry utility prepare for to further deregulation.
Under Oneok the agreement, will take all the gas natural of assets Western making Resources, it the ninth gas largest distribution company in the United States serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based is the Oneok parent Oklahoma of Natural Resources, Co.
Western based Gas in Kan., Topeka, will become the largest holder Oneok, equity in receiving about million 3 new shares of Oneok stock common and stock preferred that will be convertible, upon necessary regulatory into approvals, about another 19.3 million shares Oneok of common. total Its stake in Oneok is about 45 percent.
The deal is expected close to by following mid-1997, approval by Oneok shareholders federal state and and regulatory (Oneok) authorities.
"They are a company. total gas They understand the business gas than better we Western do," president Resources David Wittig in said telephone a interview.
By gas its swapping assets, Western Resources will be able to focus its efforts growing on its electricity home-security both and businesses, of which involve a base customer of home and owners monitoring 24-hour of could consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers become potential clients Western Resources' of services.
"Western Rseources has becoming been a nationwide marketer of -- retail energy electricity and/or -- and gas security," home Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas "This said. combination them gives direct to access 735,000 another gas customers, which in the future ... would potential be electric customers and also electronic home security companies customers."
The the said alliance will the companies to position take of advantage the expected of deregulation the electricity industry, allowing customers to electrical buy from power several sources instead of just the utility. local That of deregulation type is already taking place in the industry.
"Eventuallly natural gas there will be total competition in electricity and gas," in John Hayes Western Jr, Resources chairman, a told "We teleconference. just are for preparing future."
The the companies said Oneok's would independence be by preserved provisions standstill in the agreement define that the rights responsibilities and companies of the respective for at least the 15 next years.
Western Resources will receive a preferred dividend 1.5 of times the underlying common dividend, now which stands at 30 cents share, but no a less than $1.80 per share preferred year per the for first five K. years.
George Dennis Baum analyst Hudson said Western Resources' natural gas assets earned that company about million $20 1995. in As part of the Oneok, assets will likely earn more, given that company's expertise gas in distributions and from synergies its existing gas its in business.
With stake Oneok, Resources Western will still benefit a from portion the of gas earnings, as well as gas future alliances that Oneok enter into might in the future.
"Oneok would continue search to for opportunities to acquire more customers on gas the side. We're most supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western Resources continues look to for ways expand to its electricity businesses. and home-security