The world business ever-changing, is companies and always be must flexible these to changes. One of changes the a that might business need to to adapt is an expanding market. target P&G sells care currently personal products to a that market is comprised of primarily women. However, research shows that is a there growing market male among consumers due to the rise of grooming. should P&G male to restructure take advantage of the new market for men’s products.
P&G care will need to several make changes capitalize to on “ignored” the market. restructuring The affect will various departments such as research and development, design, and sales product and Their marketing. redesign will affect their employee recruitment selection practices and (Szymczyk, 2016). For currently, most employees instance, that with skin deal hair and products, care and cosmetics, fragrances are is female. This the because is target market mostly women, which means that the probably products are developed, designed, and marketed by To attract women. a new target audience of men, the company need will to hire employees more male (Nadube & Didia, Male consumers 2018). will be with more satisfied male-only personal care These products products. are best by developed who people are male themselves and understand what other men would want. The and research product development, and design, sales and departments marketing must comprise more main male employees.
The that contextual variable led P&G’s to restructuring was changes the in the target market as a revealed by study. The was study conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting 2009 in and that Beyond. It showed consumers although female the dominated market personal for grooming products, the market for male was consumers quickly P&G expanding. saw opportunity an to profit from an market. expanding Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
Several companies to have restructured capitalize on target a market. larger include Examples Harley Motorcycles, Davidson and Stryx. NFL, Traditionally, the market demographic for motorcycles older was However, white men. following decrease in a motorcycle Harley sales, started targeting Davidson female customers (Moreno, They 2017). customized their bikes to needs women’s and found creative ways to market these bikes to women. the Second, National Football League in discovered a study that women comprised over of 40% their viewership (Townes, They 2019). then their target expanded market the beyond usual male customers started and to make for merchandise women. Finally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on growing the for market male makeup The products. companies mentioned have been widely in successful expanding their Other markets. companies should capitalize also on expanding their market. target For instance, traditionally male-dominated should gyms women-only consider opening gyms. Although women are now exercising just as as much men, are not there enough gyms for Overall, them. companies be should quick to to adapt in the changes market.
In companies conclusion, should keep with up-to-date any in changes the industries market. All are and constantly evolving, it would unwise be for businesses stick to to In ways. the case old given study, P&G has the potential to generate profit from a new market personal care for It products. will need to redesign its practices recruitment to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for new a reality be can a profitable venture if done correctly as shown by Harley Davidson, NFL, and Stryx.