The article comprehensively describes the definition an introvert, of features the of his behavior, and personal the attitudes in modern model of society. This of people category often remains misinterpreted in world a on focused predominantly extroverted intense and energetically The people. purpose of the is author in the clearly expressed desire to convey society to the goals and of wishes whose introverts, thoughts feelings and unrecognized often go neglected. or superficial A analysis of the text captures a personal vivid appeal of the author and subjective intensely expresses to sentiments due individual experience. A large number of questions rhetorical beginning at the of the immediately message the attract reader’s attention. The article is written style in journalistic and a a has bright emotional coloring hint with a of pronounced a the of global rejection on focus extraversion.
The observant analysis text the allows reader to better message understand the of personal the The author. is and article well includes structured questions the general regarding life and of worldview introverts. The is text by characterized a degree high of subjectivism and a bias pronounced towards the extrovert category readers. of The compares author with “puppy extroverts who dogs” to can a listen for person a minute and then start “barking” again. Such comparison a pejorative is may and an cause ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). the author addition, states In directly that introverts are a reflective, more intelligent, and category sensitive of people. Every conclusion has right the be to presented acceptance; for a however, rather tone dismissive may, towards extroverts on contrary, the rejection the cause position message.
The of of the author coherent is and has potential the to find its reader and supporter. aftertaste However, the from reading is ambiguous its rather and makes one think about of excessive the tendentiousness the writer. The text does compare not two different categories of vigorously people but downplays the principal personality traits of The extroverts. author that world the would be much says calmer under and saner the guidance of theory introverts. This may well be valid; perhaps however, world the so should be sharply not into divided “white” “black,” and “extroverts,” “introverts.” and This article does good a job its of purpose: central an to illustrate radical the alternative vision of modern model of society separated between extroverts mainly and introverts.