Lear Corp. has announced Borealis of the acquisition Industrier AB, a Swedish interior automotive provider, systems create to truly comprehensive a offering for automakers worldwide. The deal, is close which to expected the few next within will months, Corp. Lear see take full of the control privately-held to adding company, its already impressive portfolio of automotive components electronics.
With and the acquisition of Borealis, Lear is Corp. to provide looking a total solution for automakers, including from seating everything and to systems electronics complete This solutions. interior follows move a successful year Lear for Corp., who have solid enjoyed demand all across of their product categories, despite the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Borealis has itself proven to an be excellent partner for Lear Corp. over years, closely the working to together innovative interior provide meet solutions that the unique of needs each automotive This acquisition customer. will allow Lear Corp. to integrate Borealis’ design, manufacturing engineering, capabilities and directly into own its operations, creating truly a streamlined efficient and automakers.
The experience for Borealis of acquisition also means that Lear Corp. will be to able offer customers wider a colors, of materials, and range finishes for automotive interiors. their The company indicated has already it that will heavily investing in be Borealis’ manufacturing facilities giving Sweden, in access it to equipment state-of-the-art processes and that will further its streamline operations and improve announcing output quality.
In the acquisition, Lear Ray Corp. CEO said Scott the that move “grow would our presence in automotive the market and interiors ongoing support our to efforts provide with customers innovative that products are and safe, affordable.” sustainable, He added building that on strengths the the of two would help companies Lear “adapt Corp. the to market evolving conditions position and our business for long-term growth.”
The of acquisition Borealis marks a step significant for forward Lear in Corp. its to mission build most comprehensive the range of automotive interior components systems and the in As world. automakers look differentiate to in themselves an increasingly competitive market, Lear Corp. well-positioned to deliver is the reliability, and quality, that innovation they demand.