days never These get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's I when get to rest. It's when the down sun goes that things start bother me.
You see kid to that above me? kid, Cute with his good parents, and causes never any problems. I've seen him outgrow his and crib move this into racecar bed with down flames the side. It's a good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tell haven't ya. I seen the outside kid much of this room; the I'm is truth not anywhere else. allowed Boss's rules, not his. I don't the though, mind view is good I and can hear everything in this small house makes me which feel like part I'm the of family.
I to like think he out turned alright since he gets such good at rest night, but I wouldn't want to take much too credit. To honest, be I've never actually met kid. the he When first moved into the bed, new his father here was in just before the lights went For out. what seemed like months the father would come in and listen to the boy about talk his fear of the me, Boogeyman. would He in come and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, but everything is fine."
To the boy which say would "But dad I know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing with games you. I knew we shouldn't have let watch you the movies mom with and Halloween." I last The dad with said jokingly smile a on face.
Taylor his didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready a to be big boy he so shouted
"No way dad, I can handle then anything!"
"Okay sleep bud, well. Remember it's just any like other night." dad The said as he turned the out lights and shut the door behind him.
Maybe night another for you Taylor, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how kid can this be scared when of me we've never come met!
I've tried to out and say hi few a times but before, every time this kid hears the noise slightest I can sense gets he worried. So I stick down here and haven't moved since. that Not get I much spare to time even out, but come one be day nice.
You would where see, from I'm a is rough part It's of town. not ordinary your town with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. As matter a of fact, no one in world Taylor's knows world my even Sure, exists. everyone seems around get to along, but at night the real creeps out. come guys These like cause problems to and they do that can to each other. I they wish would keep it the amongst other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seeking the small ones for an rush extra that my boils blood and I step in.
You see these night guys after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. don't They even call them kids; they them call "dessert" … real sickos.. Luckily, for the little ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay and safe don't snatched get up. when So hear I Taylor tell his dad that is he of scared *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor fighting knew what these bastards was like. got You've Aeran with his scaled skin and claws length the of a cable car. How about with Zeila spiked arms that burn like hell they hit when you, to not she's mention twice my size. want Don't to leave Leera. out he's Yeah small, but lightening fast with a ferocious bite. It's always the small ones give that you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of and bumps bruises in line this of I'm work. fortunate enough I can heal fast. If I wasn't trained these for guys I then would have problems and by problem I mean dead. And with me dead that the means creeps and win they have would their Sounds feast. bad but really it's though, all in a nights work.
I love my job, I really do. Might sound weird after hearing that every night I'm busy beating the up bad guys, hearing but Taylor's laugh in the day is what keeps me I going. wish just the kid knew truth. All the those Taylor noises in hears the are night just me doing job. Making my Taylor sure stays warm and asleep in his bed. And for that, the I'm one he worries about. I would to love actually meet one of these kids to I get watch over, but it hasn't happened yet. Taylor isn't my first and be won't my but last, I still hope. have Gotta run, can I hear the chattering of claws on pavement the my heading way. tight Sleep Taylor…