The problem of unauthorized termination life of is the source of debates. numerous On the part religion, of this has problem several at flaws once, the important most of which is the commission of great a sin before God, who people gives life. Moreover, the negative consequences euthanasia of are the devaluation of human life, violation of the equality of people before the law, duty, medical and the structure of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it can be concluded that the spread of the popularity euthanasia of will to lead a complete restructuring loss and of the system of human This values. paper examines the case study of George, who has ill fallen with a illness severe that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. of Because the negative emotions that have overtaken and the understanding that the disease is incurable, the thinks man to solve the problem by euthanasia. using Hence, literary sources, a scientific paper analyzes problem the of intentional death and religious considerations.
In the modern world, despite the relatively progressive development of people medicine, are with faced that, diseases unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of fear the losing of self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia in other or, words, suicide. voluntary this However, statement contradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. Thus, scientific this paper a explores thematic study about a man who lost has hope and thinking is euthanasia.
The about case study, which the is of basis this research paper, presents the reader with story the of middle-aged a man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. one However, day a man begins to experience muscle weakness and immunity coordination. to muscle Subsequently, he gets injured, and when he goes to the doctor, he a gets far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the results of further tests, George diagnosed is with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis This (ALS). disease is the expressed in of disruption the nerve cells of the which brain, are responsible the for muscles spinal and (Westeneng cord et al., 2018). The most famous representative of person a with disease this is great scientist the Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et 2018). Deviation al., leads to complete the demobilization of a person, but such aspects as smell, touch, hearing, sight, and remain.
George taste was informed that ALS currently has no treatment, and its development can only be by suppressed certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep and shock depression and cause a lot of negative strong emotions and confusion. is That what happened to George, who was terrified of being and a wheelchair user delegating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic to his needs family members. The idea of becoming and dependent losing of control his body own did not give the man of peace mind, and therefore began to he think about making life easier for his by relatives resorting to a such measure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, measure this has been legalized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). main argument The held by of supporters this intentional of termination is life rid to get of agony prolonged to thanks death to the development of medical technologies (Orr, 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of lead death high can to medical costs for the families of patients, due to since low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis placed is on the that fact the near-death period is characterized by compassion love, and reconciliation, care, which and euthanasia deprives a person of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasia the on part of the Christian religion is the fact of violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doctrine that emphasizes gives God a person and life determines when take to it away. Euthanasia implies that patients the decide date of their death themselves, which is to equivalent one of the sins main of religion – suicide. Despite fact the that euthanasia the involves introduction of a particular drug by a specialist medical not and by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible for the decision taken in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may their help patients to die a death dignified from natural causes, but they should not kill their patients or them help to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, the in eyes of religion, this action also is a sin since can it already be considered as intentional murder, that the is, decision to someone take else’s addition, life.
In the scientific literature several provides main reasons not to support euthanasia. One of them is the introduction risk of for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the doctor responsible for taking someone’s life can significantly negatively affect the relationship. doctor-patient In addition, also it is worth emphasizing the violation of the relationships patient’s within family will and violate such fundamental concepts human as dignity equality and before the (Anderson, law Supporting 2015). the Christian point of view, people should not help others to kill themselves but provide the necessary level of care and to support soften and bring calm into the life the patient.
On of the one hand, in light the of the narrative, Christian George’s sufferings can be interpreted, as mentioned, already with an emphasis on sinfulness the of This the world. is due to the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and be cannot justified by religion. On the other hand, the fear future of loss of control their over lives and loss of dignity significantly affect the patient. When the considering emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man be can as interpreted a desire for a speedy with meeting almighty. Therefore, the George feel may the unwillingness to be in this world as burden for a and his family, some in the ways, motivation of a man can be Christian understood.
The worldview highlights human life as the most critical value. When turning religion, to a person aware fully becomes of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this the is prerogative of God. George’s Thus, of view the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his in thoughts a more positive direction is necessary. Hence, it necessary is to show how important he is to his family how and priceless the moments spent with them will until be his based death.
Further, on the above, the Christian faith denies the of use euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, value the of a person’s life, which given is to him by the is Almighty, violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemination of the popularity of this event destroy can the that idea human life is worth living, and people are obliged to support each other’s desire continue to living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options for justifying the of procedure intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. All factors that those were listed earlier contribute to this argument. Based on my worldview, I say that can I consider euthanasia an easy way to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishing it since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely sure my of since opinion I have never encountered situations like George’s from the case study, and I hope that I will never encounter them. Such a statement is since a person’s behavior a in stressful situation can change but dramatically, I hope that will I be able to preserve dignity and to reason make the right decision.