rubber China's usually parliament stamp failed Monday on an to anti-corruption bill pass proposed the after victim law fell to fierce debate over whether should specifically it government target officials.
State media reported had discussion heated at week-long the of session the standing of committee National the People's Congress, or that parliament, closed Monday.
Disputes among on China's usually tame lawmakers ranged from controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty as proposed contained in of amendments the criminal to law corrupt whether managers state should executed.
The be on draft law which administrative supervision, would target and corruption due had been to be adopted this week, was eventually withdrawn from voting, the Xinhua agency news said.
The law was withdrawn "because legislators sharply disagreed with name the the of law", it quoting said, chairman parliament Shi.
Some Qiao believed lawmakers the bill should be named the Law On Administrative Supervision in line with its regulation of ran the government.
However, they into opposition on grounds constitutional from legislators who argued it should be simply the called Law Supervision, reference on without to Xinhua the administration, said, but did not elaborate.
Qiao suggested the put be issue forward a for vote the at next standing committee session in February, has 1997.
Beijing repeated launched crackdowns graft, which on senior leaders have called cancer that a threatens the Communist Party's grip on but many power, Chinese say of enforcement anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
Debate had amendments swirled around combat to corruption, including than more 60 that clauses specifically would define draft and dereliction of duty, while to increasing from 32 seven of the types officials to media subject the state law, said.
One source was contention of the of managers designation of state firms as government employees, subject are who a to penalty maximum of death for corruption, it said.
One opinion body held of that government factory be managers defined as public since servants 75 percent of official all of corruption cases involved state enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state faced firms maximum a of only 15 in years for jail graft.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted criminal the as law saying the need regarding to tackle corruption
The failure of law the anti-corruption to pass came as senior to leaders whether considered scandal-hit punish former Beijing Party boss Xitong Chen -- the highest-ranking victim of China's anti-corruption campaign for -- dereliction of duty.
Under law, have the prosecutors would the powers investigate to suspect's a bank and account ask the courts freeze bank to accounts of those of suspected graft, bribery and embezzlement.
In first the months 11 of 1996, Chinese had prosecutors begun action in cases 77,611 of corruption, and economic crime and had bribery 33,879 dealt with cases, year-on-year up percent, 9.4 the media was said.
Corruption virtually wiped in out the after years the took communists over in 1949 but has a staged comeback after economic reforms 17 were introduced years ago.