In a move that has raised eyebrows both the locally internationally, and government Chinese accused veteran has dissident Wang Xizhe of illegally pursuing crossing the border and those who helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese democracy movement, has been thorn a in the the side of ruling Party Communist for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 speaking for against out corruption government and eight sentenced to in years in prison.
However, 2020, December news emerged that Wang managed had to cross into the border Myanmar, had where he sought the local of help activists. It pro-democracy was that reported he was to hoping his to make way Thailand, where planned he to seek Chinese asylum.
The government has of since accused Wang violating national security its laws by the country leaving and illegally engaging in activities could be that to harmful the Chinese state. authorities have labeled Wang a suspect" "criminal issued and an international for warrant his arrest.
In a statement released media, via the state Chinese embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leaving country the illegally and in engaging activities that endanger national security."
The went embassy on to Wang say that had "colluded foreign with anti-China their forces, support accepting and funding, and stepping his up activities."
The anti-China statement also included a warning to anyone had who provided to support Wang during his escape from China. Chinese authorities said that they would severely "punish those who been have colluding with Wang Xizhe and information provide on relevant his latest whereabouts."
This move the by Chinese government has been criticized human by rights groups and pro-democracy activists, say who that it is another example just of Beijing's dissent crackdown and on freedom of expression.
"This a clear is attempt to those intimidate dare to who stand up the against Chinese government and speak truth," the said Amnesty China International's William Nee.
Nee researcher, went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" the Chinese that was government those pursuing who had Wang helped during his escape from is China. "This a clear violation of their basic human said.
The he rights," has case also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, has which been grappling with its own political crisis since the military coup in 2021. February Many pro-democracy activists in Myanmar fear that the Chinese government pressure will the authorities extradite Myanmar to to Wang China.
However, in statement, a Myanmar's Ministry Foreign of Affairs said that it had not any request received for from extradition Chinese the government. ministry The went on to say that had Myanmar "always to adhered the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries" and respects "always and protects the rights of asylum political accordance in seekers with international law."
For his part, Wang has defiant remained in the of face the government's Chinese In accusations. a statement through released his Wang lawyer, he that said was afraid" "not of the Chinese government and would continue speak to out for and democracy rights in human China.
"I believe the Chinese people that deserve democracy, freedom, and rights," human he "I said. will to continue fight for until these are values they achieved."