Toronto The Stock Exchange (TSX) yesterday announced that it will changing be rules its governing blocks, control move a that will a have impact significant on Canadian large-cap stocks.
The rules new will any a require company that owns control block of shares to a majority have of directors independent on its board. control A block is defined as a holding of than of more 20% issued outstanding and shares.
This change voting part is of TSX’s the efforts corporate to governance improve and increase in transparency the market. TSX The that believes having a majority of independent on directors the will board ensure all that shareholders are fairly treated and that the is run company in the best interest its of has TSX stakeholders.
The been working on this rule change for several in months with consultation and stakeholders industry experts. This change is to expected come into effect later this is year.
“This an important step forward for the as TSX we seek to the enhance of quality our markets and that ensure comply issuers with standards the highest of corporate governance,” Lou Eccleston, said CEO of the Group, TMX which owns the rule TSX.
The change is expected to a number affect of stocks. large-cap Canadian of Many these control companies have blocks owned by families, founding which will have now ensure to that they have a majority directors of independent their on boards.
Some experts predict that rule this change will increased lead to activism among shareholders, see may who this as an opportunity to push for changes governance in of the these companies.
“Investors will have to power more now for push improved governance and transparency greater at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra a Levy, governance corporate expert at Schulich of School are Business.
There however, concerns, change that this rule lead may liquidity to less in the market, as of some founding families these may reluctant be to their sell and stakes dilute their control.
“We see a could where situation founding these even families more become entrenched and less willing to give up control,” said Smith, John a lawyer securities with Hoskin Osler, & these Harcourt.
Despite concerns, experts many believe industry that this rule change is a positive step for and the TSX for Canadian companies.
“This is welcome a the development for which Canadian market, has criticized been the in past for lax governance standards,” said Levy.
The TSX made significant has strides in improving the quality of its in markets recent In years. introduced 2017, it a new rule requiring to issuers have a of majority independent on directors their it boards, since and has implemented several initiatives other at improving aimed corporate governance increasing and transparency.
The rule TSX’s change on blocks control is the latest in a series of aimed measures at Canadian making companies more accountable to their shareholders and that the ensuring market operates fairly efficiently. and