It started with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway but drug, to compared spice it might as well be a fortress wall. Spice opens the and floodgates you're when drowning appears it as a life with preserver a hole in since the side.
Ever I started I could shake never the feeling of paranoia; that I'd be caught, that friends would my plot against me, that I'd get kicked out my home. of My neighbours would yell at their kids to get back inside their apartment whenever I walked the down high street, as a fucking kite, waving like my arms a madman and shouting obscenities that I had made up on the spot.
I hear could them from windows, the even if they were closed. spoke They loudly and freely the with assumption that the druggie from upstairs was too wasted to pay attention, too and far to gone care if he could.
The and regularity alacrity with they which reacted to my home coming was astounding, until I put the pieces together. The paranoia, the gossip, need the for - "security" I was Those monitored. being bastards had put cameras up in the neighbourhood that would so they always know when I down came the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were as just shitty as my life was. I had spice and the rest of the world could go to hell. I started closing my windows when I realized I being watched was from the street, but the complaints and never insults stopped. I knew immediately why.
My room was bugged! Those assholes had snuck into my room while was I out and planted fucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart. I ripped my apart, mattress I emptied all cabinets the the onto floor, I took a hammer to but several walls, I could never find anything. They were better than was. I kept They talking about me. They still could see me.
After tore I down most of bedroom's my drywall I realized the truth. They didn't have any surveillance - they had telepathy. They were inside my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucking satellite dish of because drugs. the I had to know for sure. I had to it put to the sat down test.
I in the only remaining chair and thoughts focused my to my bitch below neighbour me 405. in Almost I immediately heard her cackling, grating laugh in my who's head.
"Look figured finally it out! ha Ha ha! What a fucking retard junkie! Now discovered you're our secret, little boy. What do you to want do now? Ha ha ha!"
For a brief I moment might thought I have schizophrenia, a but new voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're No, crazy? you're just worthless, a worthless sack of shit who takes spice instead advice. of Listen up, because we're going to let you a know little secret. You know the guy in 215? He's one the who's been installing cameras. the He's one who lets us know when walk you down street. the the He's one thinks who dumbest you're the motherfucker on the whole goddamn planet, and playing he's you like a fucking violin."
"He hates your guts, little boy," the woman responded. "He wants you gone, ha ha He's ha! going to kill you - one way the or other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your own brain save and him the Do trouble? one good thing in your life."
I ran out of door the and nearly jumped down three stories to get of out the apartment. The laughs wicked of my neighbours followed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I a hit beach, the sound blood of rushing my through ears temporarily muting the jeers from my apartment. When heat finally my slowed, returned, they albeit much more quietly.
Because they were so much more quiet, I was able to hear new a voice coming from nearby a parked car. He was me telling to kill myself, to jump off cliff a and end it with all single a crushing thud. I see couldn't in the tinted windows, but the voice shivers sent throughout my body and I took off running again.
I returned to the apartment, and so did my neighbour's laughter. This time, however, the same parked car I had run into at the beach was already parked in front of my A building. muscular down man the rolled passenger side and window glared directly at me blinking. without I couldn't hear his thoughts, but somehow knew he meant that to do me harm. ascended I quickly the stairs to my room.
"Listen, kid, do us all a favour. Do your a family You favour. love your family, don't you? Well, we where know live. they It would be horrible if were we forced to go down and kill them one by one, wouldn't it? it Wouldn't be much easier to kill just yourself now? Save your family."
"Ha ha ha! There's no you helping now! You're hopeless, useless, worthless, garbage and the would world be better off without you breathing my air children's and eating husband's my you food."
"Are alright?"
I paused. That was a new voice. A calm voice that cut through sea of the tortuous sirens that clamoured my death.
"If for you need help, come to us. Cross the street."
Their voice kept me silencing coaxing out, others. all I descended the in stairs a kind of stupor, forgetting about bitch the 405 in the and man I from upstairs. crossed street the and walked onto their patio.
When I arrived, they at looked me I like was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, cocking his head threateningly to the side. "You wanted lost?"
I to must shout "You help me! There is a in man my apartment that can read my thoughts and is trying to me!" kill but even as I thought it knew I he believe wouldn't me. I didn't believe me. There was only one climbed option.
I the to roof of the nearest building and steeled myself for the fall. I was getting ready to take a running leap when my face mother's emerged from the kitchen window our in apartment. The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. I couldn't bear do to and it, rushed back my locking to it room, before my mother could inside. come ran I bath a tried and to drown myself in it, every but time I came close to blacking my out body would itself push out of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue later, I'm off to bed. Hope you it like far. so