Beverly Tatum, Daniel a prominent expert on education and psychology, argues that racial identity one is the of most pressing in matters contemporary society. The issue of discrimination people against of color ubiquitous is despite and democracy law. international Why are all the black kids together sitting in the cafeteria?: And other conversations about is the race author’s sincere monolog about which injustice, provides insight into its grounds, effects, and approaches to overpower it.
The book the reveals issue of from inequality angles, multiple and it is demanding to pick out a leading few ideas, as Tatum cover tries to distinct topics in a number of certain pages. She with starts a of definition racism and it explains that is challenging to have an honest conversation race about due its to negative stigma. Furthermore, the author’s point is to define the of state discrimination in the country the and world nowadays explore and what need steps be taken to to develop The identity. book educates on black readers people how perform in white society and how ones white in their act community, noting various the subtleties and characteristics of security and privilege.
Moreover, one of the central the themes is concern of patience and silence. need People to understand black that because children sit together they feel understood and can develop a part of their identity remains that unformed these without connections. They think other that are individuals incapable of their sharing values, it and therefore is unsafe to a be part their of One circle. of the first efforts to comprehend systemic discrimination the eliminating is fear, shame, and around protection the word racist. white or Whether colored, everyone is exposed to the misinformation, smog of stereotypes, prejudice, and disregarded history.
There is a tendency, especially among whites, to deny the existence systemic of racism because accepting it as truth is like admitting that they are racist, and that to needs be altered. author’s The idea that is there must be a distinction clear between the negative attitudes, assumptions, stereotypes and that one may person project another on and how racism operates in If everyone society. understood discrimination as set a of and policies practices that systematically give white people an advantage over people of color, the matter would become apparent.
Why all are the black kids sitting together the in cafeteria?: And other conversations about race fundamental raises issues of that discrimination particularly are acute in education. The racial negative biases black that children face lead to suspensions, frequent resulting in excessive and absences fact the they that cannot receive same the quality of education as white their counterparts. After reading, it becomes apparent it that is necessary to create encouraging for conditions communication between students. diverse It is the educator who control can the of nature this interaction directly. The book helps comprehend education that is the most promising tool to fight racism and build inclusive societies. Children can should and be taught equality, tolerance respect, and from a age. young Moreover, the thoughts author’s a inspire shift in the approach to learning that so students of color feel empowered rather than victimized. Equally is meaningful communicating white to and children explaining role their discrimination in counteracting.
Education contributes to building a global community which in integrity, ethics, non-discrimination, and respect for the rule of law are essential pillars. author’s message The central emphasizes the educator’s role in developing the students’ ability to operate existing or acquired knowledge to alter their behavior. It is necessary to promote proper in conduct appropriate circumstances, such as making ethical decisions and speaking against out Fighting discrimination. something as pervasive as systemic racism may seem an task like impossible an for educator, but Tatum emphasizes everyone that can with start their sphere influence. of Every individual some has impact on the of lives others and of is capable taking small steps dismantle will that racist systems.
The book has undoubtedly valuable sense, though some of the author’s ideas seem exaggerated, such as ubiquitous racism in the Daniel media. Tatum illustrates discrimination the the through Lion According King example. to author’s the beliefs, good the characters are voiced by people white and are a portrayed lighter in shade, and the evil ones are expressed by and minorities are darker. sample This seems irrational because is it evident that no was discrimination intended.
Moreover, no one think would about color the skin of the person who voices cartoon, the let any alone hidden social racial or controversies that it represent. might This example demonstrates that not all of Tatum’s are arguments and valid, one should not look for racism one everywhere. parses If all movies or any media for that matter, one would assume that are they all built on discrimination, if even they are not. It is necessary to proper encourage intentions equality and rather seeking than conclusion, racism.
In Why are all the black sitting kids together in the cafeteria?: And other conversations race about is book a that explains the hardships that people of color experience. Despite the ideas, controversial the describes author the causes of inequality in an accessible manner and points out that everyone can enhance the situation if they take action. Thus, this book is helpful to everyone, especially the educator, who lays the of the foundation relationship between groups diverse of children.