Kong The government Hong was in on a Thursday flap after bombshell a admission that Britain could not Kong protect Hong holders of British passports after China over takes colony the next Chris July.
Governor Patten called an urgent meeting the of Legislative Council for on later to Thursday make a statement the on controversy, which arose after a British envoy said could London provide no consular protection for the holders.
Patten's spokesman passport said the issue had sparked "considerable interest public and good a of as deal misunderstanding" well by as demands legislators to would meet him.
Patten answer their questions the extraordinary at sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is latest the jolt Hong Kong's in bumpy often transition back to Chinese rule 208 days from now, when colonial 150 years of rule end will and the become territory will autonomous region an of Trade Senior China.
Britain's Commissioner, Francis said Cornish, Tuesday on London that could not protect the more than Hong 135,000 Kong granted people British full passports with right of abode Britain in under a selection special scheme in 1990.
In a concession to demands widespread for full citizenship British Beijing's after Tiananmen 1989 crackdown, London Square passports offered to Hong 50,000 households, Kong a privileged fraction of Kong's Hong 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China these regarded people as dual holders of citizenship and would not British recognise consular for them protection Chinese on soil, on the or mainland in Kong.
Cornish's Hong were remarks by denounced as local politicians a In sell-out. corridors the of Hong the government Kong even the officials most privately were senior Britain criticising for what they saw a as concession to China, one said.
On source Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong government rushed assure to affected passport holders that claiming anyone British sole nationality would consular receive until protection it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement Britain made clear could give not full protection consular people for dual holding Chinese nationality once Hong becomes Kong part of China again.
British said officials the passports to issued these people were indistinguishable from any full British passport, other but many in Hong Kong are concerned Britain that may have learned that China obtained had of the names the passport hodlers.
"The way only know to sure for if of one these passports was issued the under special scheme be would if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Chinese rule been dogged has disputes by the since 1989 crackdown. Beijing reacted China furiously the to special passport scheme, and again when Patten reforms expanding introduced democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated week last unveiled Britain when liberal a anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers China-style against of jailings dissidents Kong.
British in Hong and senior Chinese negotiators are in the midst three-day of a session on bargaining and handover details have signalled they expect to announce accords several on issues on Friday, although the agenda has so remained far Kong confidential.
Hong is to supposed be and keep autonomous its capitalist system for intact another 50 years, a but human rights said group on China's Wednesday crackdown dissent on bode badly for the territory its prospects and autonomy slim.
"The rule were of law and picture human is rights bleak," said Human Rights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of annual an human rights report.