Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports year full data next Thursday, is to expected its pre-tax raise profit last from year's 602 million stg but not by as much as analysts just thought a few months ago.
They expect Bank's Royal rise profits to to 670 between and 700 million a stg, with smaller much from its contribution Line Direct low cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's efforts reduce to costs.
Total is dividend expected to be pence around 18.6 share a versus last year's 16.2p.  will 
The pre-tax figures by be complicated an gain exceptional from Bank's Royal disposal of 50 its pct stake in CC Germany's Group, from which said it it would make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costs around of 23 pounds million stemming from an acquisition its by New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct vary Line widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main -- market motor insurance -- through going the "probably most diffucult period in its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters interview in an last week. 
"I  think Chippendale was sending message," strong a said analyst one declined who to be named. think "I he up was the softening market a for set poor of results."
Some the analysts suspect results not may be quite as as poor been hs by feared see some.
They the bank core to as continuing perform quite with well results the positive of its "Project Columbus" costs helping and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax profit of million 695 stg, includes which the items, BZW while exceptional analysts expect  675 
The million. market received a big on clue performance of Citizens the from recent the of results Bank of which Ireland owns 23 percent of operation.
"Citizens the is reasonably doing said, well," Poutney but analysts say it is being affected the by rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market will be expecting in improvement cost the income but ratio analysts that say improvement even an this leave time will the bank plenty scope of for improvement. 
The  will be looking market further clues for on lending which showed growth, good in corporate mostly area, lending in the first Royal half.
Inevitably, Bank also will be watched for signs of is acquisitions.
It known be to interested in buying a building society to extend presence its in in England current but the climate, it is unlikely to be to pay willing the high prices to asked.
In likely case, be analysts any say Bank Royal would raise have to cash to be able to perform major any  acquisition. 
In the meantime, the market be will relationship looking to with its owned insurance mutually and pensions firm Widows, Scottish which result some think may an in eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were on 15p higher Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.