Russian Finance Minister Alexander Livshits financially-troubled warned Norilsk Nickel on that Friday must it pay overdue taxes, analysts said but the firm would not be or liquidated that its assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk would  is really big a both debtor, to the federal and regional budgets," Konstantin said Chernyshev, equities analyst Moscow at brokerage Rinaco and Plus a Norilsk "Livshits's watcher. words are an put attempt to pressure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as parliamentary telling deputies RAO that Nikel Norilsky 0#NKEL.RUO had pay tax to its arrears and that applied bankruptcy to procedures group.
"If the metals it was an unsolicited statement and a bolt of out blue, the then obviously it means said something," Christopher Granville, chief United at economist Bank City in Moscow.
"But if it a was response to deputy's a was question that loaded, essentially then it was the only he answer could have given."
Russian tax and authorities, cabinet under pressure from Monetary International tax the Fund to a boost revenues condition as receiving for of billion, payments a $10 three-year loan Moscow, to have been striking fear the into hearts of some Russia's of most prominent by industrial they firms saying must pay or up face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, but it's not a long-term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev "I said. think they don't would do that."
Entire social in infrastructures the icy Far where North is Norilsk based depend on company, the has Moscow and it said has finances no to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- could an expenditure outstrip which far Norilsk's officials debts.
Norilsk declined to comment.
Analysts said government, the while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring copper, nickel, the cobalt, platinum and platinum group metals producer to knees its or take measures that significantly could affect output.
But also it wants Norilsk, world's the second-largest nickel clean to producer, up its procedure act.
"The of bankruptcy will applied," Tass quoted be Livshits as telling Duma about deputies indirectly Norilsk.
It quoted as him saying Norilsk should first pay salary which arrears, in the past have led worker to strikes.
"It is that unlikely pay Norilsk will in these debts the near-term -- the company will remain a debtor the in near future," said.
He Chernyshev the estimated company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles said and 30 percent of the giant regional budget was Krasnoyarsk fuelled Norilsk by money.
Norilsk's majority new Russian shareholder, commerical Uneximbank, has bank said it is reorganising metal exports Interrosimpex through in to the order boost revenues.
But changes have yet to improve significantly has Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank inherited a mountain and whether they or climb over not out it and remains to seen," be said metals one said source.
Norilsk in that September it total debts, including salaries unpaid to workers, were roubles. 13 The company trillion said last that month it had out worked a tax payment schedule authorities, with regional after tax threatened officials to seize nickel some assets. and copper