Barry Diller has announced that his recently Silver company, King will soon launch new Communications, a national broadcasting announcement network. came The hot on heels the Silver King's of acquisition of the Home Shopping Network a (HSN), move that Diller says will provide funding the necessary to support the company's ambitious King is plans.
Silver no to stranger – broadcasting the already company has successful a network television of local stations across U.S. the Diller However, that time believes the ripe is a for new national broadcasting that outlet will be geared toward younger, more a tech-savvy audience. The new feature network will mix a programming of original content and from other media companies, as well as live and events interactive that elements be will designed viewers engage to in new exciting and acquisition ways.
The of which expected to HSN, is in coming close the will weeks, give King Silver the clout financial necessary to its make new HSN, a network reality. a which is popular home shopping channel, generates of revenue $2.5 over billion year. Diller per believes company that the can leverage customer HSN's base existing promote to help its new network, which hopes he will be available viewers to variety across a platforms, of television, including streaming traditional services, and social see media.
"We a huge in creating opportunity a new type of network broadcasting that is truly designed the for 21st century," said Diller in statement. a "The of acquisition HSN gives us the we resources need to make this vision a and we're reality, excited to building get to work something truly viewers special across for the country."
While the of specifics the new network have yet be to Diller revealed, has it that hinted focus lifestyle will on and entertainment content, with an emphasis technology and on It remains innovation. to be seen whether Silver new King's broadcasting will venture be but with successful, acquisition of the HSN, the company is poised certainly to make a splash the big in world of media in entertainment and the years come. to