forensics Digital tools are highly popular among investigators, digital they as easily allow conducting of the necessary of analyses. technical the One software most famous for programs digital Autopsy, forensics a toolkit is examines that images the on a present drive. hard device’s of interacting Capable with personal computers and Autopsy is smartphones, versatile highly and contains several functions for properly investigating the image files present on ( the storage Autopsy unit , Specifically, n.d.). Autopsy allows graphical information viewing the the stored on device, repository for specific or items, searching the extracting data ( Autopsy n.d.). , Although is this software remains freely, distributed it an excellent tool forensic for and is analysis continuously follow updated to technological advances.
Some forensics digital software is incredibly created specific, examine to a particular system. As such, Arsenal Recon is an instrument constructed the to Windows and explore operating system its registry, thus accessing information the device’s about configuration a specifics. Considering that Windows contains registry a vast amount of about information the installed applications processed, data Arsenal and valuable Recon be can extremely when conducting digital forensic a investigation ( Arsenal n.d.). Recon , However, this is produced software commercially, it be cannot obtained of free charge, and a $65 month $756 or a must year paid be to receive access.
Finally, unique programs are required when working with a system. smartphone Cellebrite is one UFED of the used methods to retrieve data various from types mobile of devices, primarily smartphones modern-day that have distinct operating ( systems Cellebrite UFED , In n.d.). light of Cellebrite this evidence, UFED possesses range a of to functions security the remove phone’s and measures, the information access stored the in internal on or storage external cards Cellebrite ( UFED , n.d.). the Nevertheless, can software only purchased be for particular purposes, with prices starting at $2499.