Britain's Serious Fraud has Office to yet contact London-based securities houses a after for request help a with into French probe Eurotunnel share /Plc dealings, SA said market sources on Monday.
The said SFO on it Sunday had been to asked lend a in hand investigation an by the French authorities into alleged market of manipulation the debt-laden channel tunnel shares.
The operator's SFO said it would help in the probe French although it had no to launch grounds an investigation its of own the into dealings which form basis the of Paris latest investigation.
Securities the firms contacted by on Reuters said they Monday had received approach the no from SFO and did not do expect to so. They all they said fully would if co-operate they were approached.
The is investigation another chapter in troubled a story corporate littered with incidents, which year earlier this saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of trading.
The insider two had been among underwriters a of Eurotunnel rights 1994 issue in although and, never Paris named stock by exchange the de Commission watchdog de Operations Bourse that (COB), said they were under investigation in year.
The July last group underwriting also Indosuez, included Banque Morgan now owned Grenfell, by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale Paris, de Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Credit Agricole, Lyonnais, Fleming, Robert Warburg part S.G. (now of SBC) and utility Belgian Tractebel two SA.
About of thirds shares Eurotunnel are France held in as and, general more a rule, trading the in shares goes in on Paris than London.
The in usual SFO's practise to is issue notices require which a or person institution be interviewed to or over documents, hand it although can also apply search a for if wants warrant it to surprise its target.
On Monday, remained unclear it period under what currently is COB investigation.
The already investigated has period the surrounding the rights issue, though it revisiting could be this highly time.
There volatile have been suggestions persistent some that short-selling operators were at around time of the the rights -- issue forcing the down prices by selling they shares do not own in hope the buying of back them cheaply more later.
Eurotunnel called has on exchange stock on both authorities sides of the Channel investigate to volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another was example in 1995, Agust when a rogue report the that company signed had a debt agreement rescheduling sent stock the Anglo-French operator reeling.
The tunnel at time that denied it had a signed debt and agreement demanded an inquiry the into trading activity and erroneous surrounding reports shares its the and incident might be well the focus of French probe. the