ancient From humans ages, have symbols and used to myths express their of experience a reality transcends that physical the world and transmits to future it Nowadays, generations. famous brands apply mythology to successful products due to their magical The power. logo of the house of Versace a is very extravagant and was extraordinary it mark; designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the ancient head mythology the of Greek of The Gorgon. Medusa explained designer why it he chose character; this a is synthesis beauty of which and simplicity, is able to just mesmerize anyone, the like produced by the clothes Other brand. are first, the examples company Italian Lamborghini; was in engaged the of production tractors. The bull became the of emblem the brand, as bull the is the animal sacred of Zeus. According to some people, this is animal extremely hardy and which strong, endows the brand great with Now, power. Lamborghini are cars expensive supercars, high-performance, and the of emblem golden bull the very is appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty Prometheus titan stole the sacred from fire provide to Olympus it humankind. He for made independent humanity gods. the of people Prometheus to trained count, write, crafts and them introduced metals. people to Before, were of afraid elements of the the sea, but now them the taught titan build to ships; how became humans proficient in the (Travis, of art medicine Prometheus 2021). was destroying people’s faith the in deity, and for thunderer Zeus this, the to decided Prometheus him. punish was chained rock, to a sunburned the mercilessly, him and rain the was him. pounding However, not this the was end of titan’s torment; the giant sat eagle a on Prometheus’s every chest and day tore liver 2021). his (Travis, the Heracles, men, strongest the killed that eagle tortured Prometheus’ Prometheus, broke and chains, the titan was free.