football English champions Manchester extended United their outstanding recent stock form market Monday on as bid renewed speculation sent share the soaring price by over 10 for the second percent straight session.
The latest gains by were weekend a report Sunday in the Express that American Mark IMG McCormack's agency marketing was considering a for bid United.
"We never make comments unsubstantiated on press stories," an said IMG's official at office. London But said he IMG, that active most in sports such as tennis golf, interested and in increasing was its involvement football.
Earlier in lost year this out IMG company sportwear to Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympique Express Marseille.
The said report that any credible for bid United have would be at pitched to around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at million around 430 pounds shares ($678 million).
United rocketed on again Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the at club 350 around million share pounds.
The has virtually price trebled since start of the the year and added 25 almost percent last in sessions the two alone.
The latest winning was run when triggered chief executive Edwards Martin said week last that United's status Britain's as most profitable soccer club it made a likely bid target.
Publishing VCI group is reported have to 300 made a million bid pound earlier for United this which year was rejected.
Analysts that say be United would an target attractive for media citing companies, U.S the of example television mogul Turner Ted owns who the baseball Atlanta team.
The Braves income potential from pay-per-view television deals also is helping to drive the share may price make and United's main shareholders think about twice selling now.
"The own directors percent 22 of the club...They back can sit for five years and enjoy the football then and enjoy benefits the the really when big money in comes from pay-per-view," Vinay said Bedi of Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view brokerage is expected to by be introduced the of end the century and allow could leading clubs such as to United earn tens millions of of annually from pounds television.
Focus on juicy future such also pickings lifted shares in Hotspur, Tottenham the other Premier League club with a full Stock Exchange London listing. 11p They to added who 461p.
United, last season won the English coveted league and Cup F.A. double, had income television of 5.7 in million pounds 1995-96 when the club a made 15.4 profit of million before tax.