Czech power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday said its nine profit month hit 8.4 net billion up ($312.6 crowns from million), 7.4 billion for the same last period according year, to accounting international standards, after household electricity surged.
CEZ's demand of Director and Planning section Analysis Petr Voboril told news a conference that higher write-offs depreciation due the opening to installations cut new of the and company's obligations, its tax boosting bottom line.
The company's gross profit for period the remained at flat billion.
Czech 13.1 accounting put the firm's profit for nine the first months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ the said result did not change the firm's under profit Czech forecast for standards the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to year's.
A last financial CEZ showed wrote statement billion off 4.1 the first in nine months compared 3.4 with in billion same the period of 1995, and paid 4.7 in billion income tax 5.7 after billion year.
"Above last all, lowering tax of obligations connection in depriciation with policy have this influenced (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said overall that demand for electricity rose by percent 5.5 in the period, and expected is to reach a of record high 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent year-on-year, up for the whole 1996.
Household drove consumption the rising increase, 10.5 while percent, large clients demanded almost two percent more power over the same period the last of year.
Voboril said a that recent by ruling the Finance Minstry on prices charge maximum CEZ can regional distributors power did not results effect thanks the to ministry sales increase.
The that decided the maximum average price CEZ can supplies charge for this is year 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, two up crowns from the last year below but the 1,040 firm's crown expectation included in business said plan.
Voboril that short-term of indebtedness as increased CEZ well as expenditures financial due unpaid to debts from some regional of distributors, eight the 3.2 which totalled crowns billion as of September and of six 30.
CEZ the regional country's eight operators grid had been locked in a price with dispute CEZ until ministry the ruling month.
CEZ also last is considering bond an international as issue next year needs it financing but has already flooded the domestic market said.
Local paper, with Voboril welcomed the analysts results said but did not they them expect to help CEZ's share price much the as Prague is Stock Exchange plagued by a of lack confidence.
"The CEZ are results slightly than better I expected. CEZ fundamentally is but genereal undervalued market sentiment is very not said strong," Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I expect price don't the go up to to 1,000 in next the few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 the crowns on Stock Prague Exchange on Friday to at close 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003