Finance Mercury Co is to likely spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to out work to arrangments its solve liquity crisis, failure the of which the could company force to file for bankrupcty analysts protection, and said.
The Lake attorney's Forest, auto Illinois-based finance company not said it Friday could raise new paper commercial to repay maturing and could debt not pay $17 million commercial in paper due Friday.
A finance company makes like Mercury money the on difference, spread, or between pays what it to money borrow and higher the rates it customers. charges its A finance company without of a source is funds like a retailer source without a of analysts merchandise, noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one equity company that analyst follows the said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard & Poor's Corp, lowered commercial Mercury's paper to a default rating Friday.
"They're close very some to reorganization, bankruptcy filing, a probably voluntary reorganization," said Kmiotek, analyst Thomas Duff at Phelps & Rating Credit and Co.
He other analysts noted the company has $100 another million commercial in due paper Thursday, Mercury February  6.
A spokesman did not return repeated seeking calls the comment on company's Friday financing afternoon.
Aside the company's from current inability Mercury to sell debt, is facing a host also of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the said company it had to restate its net the over income past four years by a of total about million $90 of accounting because irregularities.
Lawsuits not do become a financial liability for the company there unless is a in judgment favor shareholders. of the the company's However, of admission misstatements makes it easier for sharheolders the to prove their case, leaving only the questions who of would have pay to how much, one securities said.
"Securities lawyer are very, laws simple," very said Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfirm "If Coff Holleb & is there or an ommission a misstatement of material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, market the company's plunged capitalization about by $2.2 Friday, billion based on the 13 point of fall and the Mercury's shares 172 million shares the company it said had outstanding late That year. equity last the reduces cushion company has the available show its to creditors, Koenig said.
But also analysts said the company $1 had about in billion loans on receivable its books at the end October, 1996 of an -- asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned validity of the the amount of they receivables have on their or the quality books of receivables," those Kmiotek generally Mercury said.
Also, has been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help it negotiate with its and banks continue a as concern, going said analysts lawyers and familiar with the company.
Mercury said a in statement it is in discussions its with lenders to satisfy working capital but that needs, it could not predict the outcome of discussions. those