The U.S. top government's Asia official, Winston was Lord, to hold with talks Chinese Deputy Minister Foreign Liu in on Huaqiu Beijing a range issues of including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for and Asian East Pacific Affairs, arrived on for Tuesday the unannounced visit and was a keeping low while profile in a Beijing, embassy U.S. official said.
However was he due to hold Deputy talks with Minister Foreign Liu a and with possible meeting Foreign Minister Qian on Qichen was the before agenda Lord left on Thursday for Japan, said.
In diplomats State Washington, Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for visit next a month by of Secretary State Warren but Christopher, officials said range a wide of other issues almost would certainly be raised.
"Human come rights diplomat will up," said.
Washington one last sharply week the sentencing criticised dissident of to Xiaobo Liu three years in a labour camp, well as as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Dan, Wang on the capital charge plotting of subvert to government.
U.S. the officials say relations China with have in generally recent improved months, but there have been frictions in past the two weeks over its treatment of over dissidents and reports fresh of to Chinese nuclear sales Pakistan.
"I all think issues on are the table in (Lord's) with discussions Chinese. the It wouldn't me surprise at if all that issue the of alleged sale of items between China Pakistan and came Burns up," he said said.
Nevertheless, Washington continued to maintain that had China not violated pledges past the with sale, which Washington the Times said last week a consisted of special industrial furnace and diagnostic high-tech equipment.
Burns also said human issues rights were be likely to raised.
Diplomats said Beijing almost certainly would be angered by that reports Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's visit last to China 1993.
Christopher in is due to visit China 21-22 on November a on trip originally announced in July.
The visit would mark highest the in since point relations ties after plunged Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid private a the visit United to in June, States 1995 -- trip a that Beijing.
Both enraged sides have said they moving are towards a of possible exchange visits presidential during 1997.
Among outstanding that issues U.S. could spark anger are alleged the nuclear and sales human record, China's rights while Beijing Washington blames for holding up its application membership for of World the Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had the possibility considered of his trip extending beyond South Korea when he left Washington week, last but did not finally decide do to until so he already was in Asia.
Lord came to after China a visit to South Korea discuss to tensions over the beaching of a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast month. last  
"With more more (listed) and firms involving in such takeovers, regulation supervision and become has a tough task," said one with analyst China Guotai Securities.
"The central government not should wait until there are too before many taking headaches measures sort to things out," he said.
But that the analyst said despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus the of stock market over the few next years because of restrictions in other including a areas, ban between on listed mergers firms and unlisted firms.
In six-year history the modern of China's stock markets, there has been no of case a of takeover one listed firm another. by