The Poem of The Righteous a Sufferer is poem about Mesopotamian the unjust of suffering a suffering man. The Poem small, is consisting of 500 nearly lines, and written in Akkadian. is It to relevant its time of because, creation the by 13th century B.C., had to people already the begun understand need for moral foundations. The is story in told first the person, who his honors gods, but suffers many from illnesses. The Poem a of is kind reflection of alienation from the divine, drawing attention to injustice and the problem of morality. In regard, this the of Poem the Righteous Sufferer allows the historical community to explore Mesopotamia’s ancient cultural values and social and attitudes.
First foremost, Poem the is seen one as of the beginnings of the biblical narratives of the Old The Testament. fall of man and his repentance elements are of essential Poem. the In terms of its cultural it contribution, is crucial the to understand Babylonians’ view of the Awareness divine. the becomes companion of the protagonist, Poem’s he and realizes that not all the good happens that to him is good to God. His lamentations seen are as a prayer complaint against the injustice accompanying a man, no how matter wealth much possesses.
The he source demonstrates how people’s and consciousness life’s doubts about value have been transformed. This cultural shows heritage a that lifestyle righteous does mean not good treatment from the deities. Possible significantly injustice so affects society, the protagonist laments, “the persecutor me persecutes day in and day out,” without what understanding he deserves it for of righteous (Poem Even the sufferer). the of healing his troubles does not make him happy, and thinks that he grave “the is the near, shroud is ready for me” because he has already confronted once God’s will of (Poem the righteous sufferer). culture The of the time forced the man to hope for the best, even though the deities did not explain their social decisions.
The problems in the Poem are revealed set as a of attitudes followed by the protagonist. “the He considers joy of the heart” the days of glorifying honoring the God, and king, striving for the prosperity state’s (Poem of the righteous sufferer). In figure, his can one the discern image of man the of antiquity, who, through suffering, through the goes of way hard life. experience, The sufferer’s adherence tradition, to and established social received principles moral merits These merit. be can seen as a justified hope, and with this knowledge, we can understand why biblical motifs originated in The Babylon. was social reality grace that could be divine earned only hope by and faith.
Based on the source, can one the appreciate how was man tightly to bound society. protagonist speculates The about fate its and trying volatility, to understand good why deeds and praise of God have not brought him grace. He just wonders why and rewards laws do accompany not good (Poem of people the righteous sufferer). Thus, the overall social mood of Poem the is and restless unknown: the the reasons why send gods misfortune society to remain unspecified and unknown.
The Poem of the Sufferer Righteous thus the reveals issues culture and of society that existed the in middle of second decade the B.C. The of cultural precepts society gradually changed from complete trust in deities an to understanding the of necessity morality. of Human consciousness at that time was transformed, and for hope the best was the companion. Society’s social attitudes are through the expressed main character’s rituals: honoring God praising and the king. The hope for best was the only fulfilled the through execution of these rituals.