Australia-based transport equipment hire and firm, logistics Industries Brambles reported Ltd, percent a 15.8 profit for the lift year Friday 1995/96 on despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire venture joint with Britain's compensated Plc GKN otherwise for growth slow from Australia, company the said.  continuing 
"The improvement in our in performance reflects, part, the retionalisation successful wholly of our businesses strong owned and growth from joint our CHEP Chief ventures," Brambles John Executive Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in particular, continues to justify in confidence growth our its term long prospects in the region," he said in Bramble's net rose profit statements.
Brambles' profit to A$215.1 million million) (US$169.9 the for to June year 1997 30, from in A$97.7 million 1994/95, but the previous year's result by undermined was large a loss. abnormal 
Pre-abnormal for  profits 1995/96 rose A$214.8 15.8 percent to million, at the end top of expectations.
Pre-tax analysts' profits 13 rose percent and percent from 30 Europe and United the States while respectively, profits Australian rose eight profits percent.
"Overseas grew at twice rate the Australia in and the trend likely is continue," Fletcher to said.
"In particular expect we further from contributions CHEP Europe in and said. North he America,"  later told 
Fletcher this Reuters from strong peformance Bramble's non-Australian operations encouraged had it to actively look at further acquisitions Australia.
"You outside anticipate should acquisition some work the in Hemisphere, Northern but businesses in already we operate here," in he referring said, to like areas transport rentals equipment and records managements.
Looking he ahead, said strong contributions the United from States Europe and should continue offset to Australian conditions soft and help profit produce growth.  
"We haven't an got expectation will that we get too much this economy help ... from at for least another he six months," all said. in "But we've all got enough going things to (profit) see another for increase this year," added.
The he generally result pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet as the operations note.
"CHEP main USA bullish is area," the outstanding said Macquarie analyst Equities Ian long Myles.
"As as they're saying positive things about in CHEP the then USA they'll be and alright there's reasonable a amount of momentum there," Sydney another transport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed up five at cents against A$18.90 market a overall. soft