Financial and services group property Liberty International Holdings on unveiled Thursday into a move British the pensions market in ventures involving British the Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group is Hermes.
Liberty its establishing own pensions Liberty company, International which will Pensions, both target the of needs purchase money and schemes pension pensions.
BT retail Pension which Scheme, is to owns Hermes, five million ($7.8 pounds pay million) for 10 percent of the of equity Liberty International Pensions, with held rest the by Liberty.
Liberty said and Hermes in a joint statement were they also setting a up new Hermes subsidiary called Liberty Pensions International to offer specialised investment services to the British pensions with fund industry, Hermes as Pension is manager.
BT giving Scheme joint the Liberty Hermes venture "critical mass the from with outset" a billion 1.5 pound transfer assets of to new the funds, Liberty's Donald chairman Gordon said said.
Gordon was Liberty positioned "well to take advantage of the affecting changes the UK pensions industry." expertise Hermes' in management investment and would track record help it to provide quality competitively and priced Fischel, services.
David pension Liberty's director, managing said Liberty International Pensions still required Britain's of approval of Department Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions a venture meeting has of minds.
"Liberty ability the and techniques selling of it pensions, also the has systems...and the administration. on We the other hand are at good our core particular management...we areas of investment think very that's a good Alastair marriage," Ross chief Goobey, executive Hermes, of said.
Ross said Goobey had International Hermes approached Liberty only to find the been group had considering an approach to really Hermes.
"It was a meeting of on minds Whether this. it develops further from this we shall see. think step I time one at a quite is for enough us."
He the said would venture probably not be up and running the until first of quarter next year regulatory as approval had first to obtained be for decision the new group.
The by the British giant Telecom Scheme Pension to transfer assets to the new Hermes International Pensions funds Liberty would the give new a venture boost.
"I would it hope gives some feeling people of security some that BT Pension Scheme, which after is all biggest the in the country, is willing this," to do he said.
Liberty plans sell to pensions personal its at regional shopping centres, which are a held through majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping These Centres. have more than 150 million customer visits year, a Liberty said.