Bre-X Minerals Ltd. been has silent since said it month last that it a formed with partnership the son of Indonesian Suharto, ruler the a that move worried and has shareholders prompted seek regulators more to information.
Despite a whirl of and rumours persistent questions that have the sent mining Canadian company's shares on roller-coaster a has Bre-X a ride, dogged maintained silence.
The Calgary-based that company controls one the of world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to press the for Company weeks. officials will take calls only from a handful of analysts, favoured according to sources.
"I market haven't any had calls returned," gold said analyst Cohen Rick with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people talk they to. Everybody's bit a in the Oct. dark."
Bre-X on announced 28 alliance its with son, Harjojudanto, Suharto's Sigit whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly about addressing questions its Indonesia in business -- many of are which playing havoc with the price stock -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the selected carefully market Sunday, press material.
On for example, the company the faxed media, analysts and shareholders a copy a from of story the Far Eastern Economic detailing Review its links with Sigit.
The article referred to possible with Sigit's ties the Indonesian army, that stated one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out asserted and that gold giant Barrick Corp. Gold to tried Bre-X push into deal.
Despite a bad questions about the article, refused to respond Bre-X and still has not whether said endorses it the story or puts any faith the in certainly suggested statements.
"I've a few times that talk they to the media and things clear up," said Winchester, Neil manager of for surveillance the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the have marketplace."
Rumours shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said month last it not would essential issue for contracts work on project the until Bre-X cleared up an ownership some dispute of with its Indonesian dispute partners.
The has put a over cloud Bre-X's to find search a major mining to partner it develop help the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but alliance the with Suharto's expected was son to the help company clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic they can get that everything within couple of a said weeks," gold analyst Michael Fowler Levesque of Beaubien who Geoffrion, said he spoke Bre-X with on he said Tuesday.
But would Bre-X not comment on the it article distributed. "They sent just it out for interest general purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were taking its toll on shares linked Bre-X to and other companies exploration in Asia complained the have uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian company that mining has an in interest the Busang through deposit an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has itself found the on defensive.
Talk being about Askatindo out is bought unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no to intention sell he out," is said.
Minorca's chairman in Indonesia this week with meeting officials Askatindo and verified the company's intentions, said.
Horst said Horst he a had slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be the frank, relationship between Minorca Bre-X and is relatively cool."