I sat at my brain desk, racking my find to who could have possibly discovered the truth behind death the of Mercer, Phillip heir the one to of most the powerful companies in petroleum the world. The job was done without scrap a of evidence, I made of that sure It simply much. made every no sense, living soul that knew killed I Mercer were the very ones orchestrated I that it. may not who this know mysterious person is I but know do that I will answer question their with a to bullet the brain.
It nearly 3:00 was when AM heard I muffled footsteps down the hallway. I for reached the silenced 9MM pistol my in bag, aiming the for entrance only to my office. corner The doorknob to began turn as I steadied my aim. Sweat was trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as if I were about to come face face to with the devil The himself. second it for took the door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have endured rather second that agonizing of torment rest for the my of then life to meet the eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It was the eyes that the giveaway. were The look in his eyes was same the as night the I thought I killed There him. was a look of superiority them, in as if to let me I know would never be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were only words the was I capable of mustering.
"For intensive all purposes I still am, to you" thanks with he replied an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you least at give me the an courtesy of now answer that I here? am knows God I have to been depths hell the of back and in last these 5 years so you give surely can me that. will I answer questions any have you recounted after."
I entire the tale crossed that our two paths on fateful that night years 5 ago. I told him how I was approached by a that man for worked Prism International, the most powerful energy corporation the world. in Prism stood to from gain the billions collapse of Mercer Petroleum, an giving even them tighter stranglehold on the market. energy The were terms simple enough, Phillip kill Mercer or everyone have I love systematically The killed. choice was made for me. My military background with the coupled fact I helped my step-father design Mercer the home made me the obvious choice for the job no there doubt. From I told him how I was able to bypass security of the his mansion because I helped design "What it it. boils down is too life your meant less to me then those of my loved The ones. part I don't understand though is how your alive! still I shot you in the head, then as you you collapsed over a knocked candle, a starting that fire your destroyed survived by home."
"I nothing more then luck. Your went through side bullet the of my jaw, lodging itself the in cheek region of my skull. The heat of fire the me surging brought back to allowing consciousness escape me to but being not without badly burned. The of thought has revenge been only the force stay driving me to alive. I that have feared might have you been a merely pawn being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. dammit But would have been much so easier to enact if my revenge it had simply been you though. But now that I know my worst been fears have I realized at least know what am I up can't against."
"You possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I have won't to do alone it because your going to me." help He said with eyes his glimmering with determination more than superiority. It was kind look the of was that impossible to refuse.