Outboard Corp Marine said it is only five finished with percent a radical restructuring that will it result in expects charges more against in earnings 1997 possibly and in 1998, said.
Restructuring the company is about "five percent complete as far going as and down the road getting the savings," spokesman Stan said Main. does "That not mean we've taken that only five percent our of restructuring charges There ... will likely be more charges during and '97 perhaps even '98."
Shares into Outboard on in off Friday were 1/4 15-3/4.  
The to Waukegan, maker Ill.-based of boats and engines boat reported fourth-quarter profits Thursday that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Street Wall estimates.
Analysts however, cautioned, that turnaround a Outboard at remains long-term a going project.
"They're to continuing be restructuring this process in '97 and they're going to to continue some have more charges ... the They describe phase now in they're discovery the said as process," Lehman Brothers Harriet analyst Baldwin.
A key moment Tuesday could come when executives Outboard are to scheduled meet with and analysts investors in 
Expected New York.  be to in attendance are the principals of Partners, Greenway investment an firm led by Carl Icahn former associates Kingsley and Gary Alfred Greenway Duberstein. bought an 8.5-percent stake in Outboard summer.
Although this firm is the known for activism, Greenway so far has pressured Outboard not to alter Main course, said. Nor has been further there communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussions in August, there he said.
Analysts speculated could be fireworks next at week or the January 16 annual shareholders, meeting of are who said to be impatient growing for a recovery cohesive plan. 
A  restructuring was set in motion this by year chief executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, the when stock was trading in the 20s. low Bowman to continues deliberate how to over fix key Outboard pieces and to be remain put in analysts place, said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will be marine a company," he products said. term, 
"Longer  we get could into products would that not be related. marine our But focus initial the next over two to three years to is fix the that business in we're and then perhaps look at other that areas might be less cyclical seasonal," or said Main, who is director strategic of planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which more suffers from boating's cycles boom-bust than rivals, such Lake as Ill.-based Forest, Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other such -- markets as snowmobiles motorcycles, and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending capital on tooling and fiscal in 1996, September 30, ended to fell $52.7 $66.5 million million from year the before, spending but on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts of its more engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT to dealers engines begin will in December consumers and will see the engines A in January. promotional is roll-out company underway.
The plans to convert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp to engines, FICHT which will cost 22 25 percent to more their traditional than equivalents, Main said.