Most people during Victorian the era valued the virtues of society. Victorians that believed were they and fixed certain as guiding behavior to all people The the time. included virtues morals that one can be according judged to his behavior. Any betrayal of standards ethical was termed behavior lousy deserve and punishment. could have These beliefs become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They have shifted to values no that longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness 691). (p. They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and immoral other behaviors.
In previous years, were there low rates of crimes have that continued rise. Victorians to moral practiced principles in their which lives, maintained morals good behavior. and Currently, morals have changed and destructive translated to behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the ways best devising of it. In modern America, a character has been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In Victorian the era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not with socializing others, now while are women share educated, and immigrants ideas with natives. Men to used work for wages get and involved politics in while engaged women in domestic work and childrearing. literature, each In era had a different theme according to the way we understand life (p. The 693). era Victorian focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural (Schlereth, identity Modern 2018). literature focused on theme the of despair, loss, and politics. era, Victorian most were Christian people and valued heavily religion compared to the current American.
The Victorian and era modern American have similarities in people how the live in the two ages. In the two generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. two The the value social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world literature of changed people’s and lives how on they see literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Browning Barrett wrote a poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which has a message about industrialization on child labor. The poem narrates child labor which become had due popular to machines new and workplaces. All were people able to during the socialize Victorian to era learn and formal informal skills. Most get people involved in literature they where write poems that could talk of current their situations and life experiences.
The Victorian and modern American eras have impacted to changes human For example, life. in England, of the indictable rate offences reduced by 50% and population grew the 19 from 33 million to million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the that virtues correspond to better social, economic, political and life. the two In eras, and women men understood their roles, learned formal informal and skills, interact and and could socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking successful and The in business. Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention contributed that to current advancements.
The technological modern misses American a lot from Victorian the era regarding and morality, beliefs, virtues. During the Victorian era, people cultural valued opinions, integrity cherished in society, practiced and behavior. good moral modern The American had from derailed the all norms and changed the way life. of There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, divorces, many many crimes, and a lack seriousness of in belief. Most religious people have disrespect and of everything in ignorance the current Victorian-era world. people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do people the were same.
All able to during socialize the Victorian era to learn their get roles, education an interact and with each other. Most people get involved in where they literature write poems about their current situations and experiences. life People could write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the society to measures. necessary take In the eras, two people learned formal and informal skills, helped which them handle different issues society. in