Co. Kellogg a Friday on drop of reported 30 more than in percent third its quarter as profits cereal its dropped volume in an intensely market.
Kellogg, competitive makes which Frosted Corn Flakes, Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, fighting is back, marketing launching plans for the fourth quarter are that aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what believe appropriate we actions," are Kellogg spokesman Lovell Richard said.
The company, world's the biggest maker breakfast of ready-to-eat said its cereals, the net for income third fell quarter to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year a ago. On per share basis, earnings Kellogg's 29 dropped 75 percent to cents, fewer with shares outstanding, from $1.05 last said year.
Kellogg its overall slipped sales 9 percent to $1.68 billion billion from $1.84 as weak continued for prices breakfast cereals a percent offset gain 1 in sales worldwide volume.
"As previously forecast, third our quarter was influenced performance by significantly competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Analysts estimate Kellogg's that cereal volume domestic sales fell 9 percent to 10 in percent the quarter.
"We third can't detail It was it. quarter a challenging in U.S. the and our was volume down," added.
Kellogg Lovell said its fourth quarter likely 1996 earnings will show slight a rise from the 77 cents earned it a year quarter ago. First earnings, 1997 however, not may match the 99 cents in the earned 1996 period.
"It's a challenging Lovell comparison," said.
Kellogg's stock concern fell over on cereal U.S. sales volume and outlook the for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 share, on New a the York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set new a 52-week of $64.125.
Kellogg low said the market U.S. cereal sluggish, overall was with sales growing about 1.5 percent, grocery measuring stores, mass merchandisers all and other outlets.
Looking ahead, refused Kellogg to outline what promotional it programmes was planning the for fourth quarter.
Analysts they said not did expect the Creek, cereal Battle Mich.-based giant to to return or deep-discount coupons buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's of left sort to speculation what they're going do," to SBC analyst Warburg Chris said.
"There is Jakubik no indication that, this at they time, have shifted from long-term their goal, which strategic is to reduce inefficient added promotions," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced on prices about two-thirds of cereals its breakfast in Other June. major manufacturers also cut this prices as year they battled and market for share tried jump-start to consumer purchases.
But price those cuts apparently alone were not enough to consumer jump-start purchases, according Smith to Barney analyst David message there Rabinowitz.
"The is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information data, U.S. Resources sales ready-to-eat cereal grocery in stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for 52 the weeks Aug. ended 11, according to most the recent available, data compared a with year earlier.
Kellogg's sales in declined volume that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 pounds million a market for share of about percent, 34.4 Information said. Resources