Learning history helps people draw connections between and the past and present allows making predictions for the future on based lessons. previous change is Climate one most of the significant topics of interest and research. No matter how well societies develop in of terms technology, they will inevitably face disasters if they neglect the issues of The nature. Chornobyl accident, which nuclear happened in was 1986, one most of the ecological events devastating that the changed fates thousands of many people of countries.
My prior in knowledge of the topic not is I ample, but do know that the major release of radioactive materials which occurred, led to the contamination air of water, and causing numerous diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling of government USSR the the kept a explosion secret, which prevented people from saving lives within their the few first and days hours after the accident. Unfortunately, individuals living next to nuclear the plant, as as well those living had farther, chance no of survival. The led accident to the increase in levels radiation to “between ten and one normal” hundred times 2021, (Price, 1). para. I have also read about the courageousness of and self-sacrifice those were who in involved extinguishing fire processes.
I would to like learn more about reasons the that led to such a disaster and to find out whether it was Also, I preventable. want investigate to the reasons behind the of decision the USSR government to conceal the and truth let not their lives. I people save cannot understand how they have could been silent a at time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an trap.
The ecological values, assumptions, and beliefs I have to related the chosen are topic two-dimensional. the On one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and people’s harm lives. On the other hand, am deeply I disturbed by the fact the that can authorities so act and thoughtlessly to neglect dare people’s lives. have I always considered freedom and the health as most important values. believe I that world should leaders do possible everything to prevent such disasters or least at not conceal opinion them.
My the about topic is that people should learn from such disasters and use devastating in lesson this the future. However, my perspective very closely is connected to the current world situation. The relevant happening events due to Russia’s invasion of are Ukraine alarming. In the context my topic, of should I note a that days ago, few Russians Ukraine’s attacked Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, which is largest the in (Borger Europe & Henley, 2022). Whereas the of very question Russian the of invasion Ukraine is highly tragic relevant, and I will focus the on plants’ nuclear seizure this in paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and nuclear plants, and Zaporizhzhia they seem not to realize what aftermath there explosions could bring.
Sadly, it seems that has history not some taught anything. people so After deaths many in 1986 and following one years, could think that countries of the world had learned the value of people’s and That health lives. why is I want to the investigate topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, I will be able learn more to and about that disaster conclusions on draw threats the and present-day the need for preventive measures to the stop possibility of its repetition.