H&R Block citing problems facing Inc., the online service industry, said Wednesday has it not complete decided to the of spin-off of rest the its online least CompuServe unit, at for now.
The Kansas Mo.-based City, which company, 80 percent owns of CompuServe after part spinning off of the online service earlier year, this CompuServe's recent cited financial troubles and uncertainties facing the industry.
Industry online analysts the said problems reflect changes the rippling through the industry online but were also partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which has about million 5.2 subscribers, slightly than more half them of outside of the United States.
America Online Inc., the largest with more than 6 million subscribers, No. 2 Compuserve and Prodigy have been hurt all users as gone have directly to the Internet lower-cost with Internet access providers rather than online services.
Some analysts have that said the which online services, offer packages of information specialised as well as access, Internet not may survive in the long though run, the eventual shape the of online industry from remains far certain.
"A the lot of people are going to read this as the market online is at a crossroads and pretty shaky," said one analyst follows who the industry.
H&R Block spun off percent 20 CompuServe in of April and had planned to the distribute rest to its shareholders.
But said it Wednesday it has that decided to proposed not present the spin-off the of rest CompuServe to of at shareholders its annual meeting for scheduled Sept. 11.
"The board to continues believe that separation a of CompuServe is in interests best the of H&R Block and shareholders will continue to consider the matter," H&R Block interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has high dropped a from of $35.50 on its first day of trading to near $10 recently. The stock rose after announcement Wednesday's new because CompuServe shares by still owned H&R will Block not come onto market.
CompuServe the added 93.75 cents $13.25 to Nasdaq, on H&R while Block fell $2.125 to on $25.75 the New York Stock Exchange. America Online added 75 cents to $31.625, also on Nasdaq.
In July, shocked CompuServe Wall Street with a warning that it expected a for loss its quarter first ended July 31, its first as a publicly traded company blamed company.
The costs the high of introducing its new Wow! consumer online and investing service of in an overhaul its network infrastructure, well as a as decline in overall subscriber growth as outpaced cancellations new customers.
In response, CompuServe and H&R were Block a slapped with shareholder alleging lawsuit misrepresented they had online the service's prospects in the for prospectus stock the the offering.
When company last week a reported $29.6 loss first-quarter of million, or cents 32 a share, it also warned investors that losses would continue for the second ending October.
H&R quarter in Block, which also is the largest filing nation's consumer tax service, is likely wait for to the online to industry settle before completing down the spin-off, analysts said.
In addition the to losses, H&R Block cited planned next the introduction month of new technology CompuServe for new and its service.
Meanwhile, Wow! America has Online had problems of own, its including price cuts to competitive stay access with Internet providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service blackout earlier this But month. analysts said that in contrast CompuServe, to America Online to has continued grow, though a slower at pace.
"The problems CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America Online in the nine next months," analyst said. one