National operator Lottery British Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted profits interim lower income as scratchcard from fell sales by over million 450 pounds executive ($750 million).
Camelot chief Holley Tim told also Reuters that planned the weekly Lottery second National draw be would on launched February 5 and be held every thereafter. Wednesday which Camelot, has faced a storm of criticism over earnings its jackpot the since was launched lottery two years ago, pre-tax reported of profits 31.5 million pounds on sales 2.1 of billion the pounds for 24 to weeks 14.
This September with compares pre-tax profit pounds of 36.2 million sales and 2.51 billion of pounds in the period same a year five ago.
Camelot's shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De GTech La Rue, Racal Electronics UK, and shared ICL a total dividend payount 10 of million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for National the weekly Lottery rose two game percent 1.68 to billion Two pounds. thirds of the adult population buy regularly tickets for the Saturday draw, event an is televised which has live and a become for many ritual of Britons.
But sales Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million last pounds year to 419 time.
Camelot million executives this said the that decline in scratchcard sales to be was expected as the initial generated enthusiasm introduction by their in March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring experience lotteries the of sales worldwide, of Instants have fallen their since launch and are now settled at around 17 pounds per million Chairman week," Sir Russell said George a in executive statement.
Chief said the Holley that weekly second draw should boost sales of National Lottery game tickets 15-20 by from percent current their weekly average of 69 said million.
Camelot that over -- billion one pounds percent 50 of turnover had been handed -- out in money prize the in first half and 567 that million pounds to had gone "Good -- Causes" projects including charities and in sports the arts.
Camelot, and has which been a granted seven-year licence, that said percent over 40 of turnover to went Causes" "Good the and in governnment duties, making it the world's efficient most lottery operator.
Profit is after tax just under total one of percent sales and dismissed Holley criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I we think a have slight problem this in country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery were companies bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation support organisations to helping the disadvantaged and disabled.