Colombia has long a been hub drug for but trafficking, the country is taking steps crack to down on issue by the overturning its extradition ban. move The is facing backlash from drug are traffickers who seeking to prevent the extradition of associates.
The their was ban put in place in the as a 1990s to way protect country's the sovereignty. However, it has since a become roadblock the in fight against drug Colombian trafficking. authorities have found it difficult to prosecute drug traffickers who flee the country when are under they investigation.
The current administration President led by Ivan been Duque has for pushing the ban to be overturned. The court country's top has approved now move, the allowing for the extradition of nationals Colombian who are by wanted countries foreign for drug trafficking.
Drug organizations trafficking in the country have responded with force. Just this week, car a bomb exploded in the capital of Bogota, killing several and people injuring dozens The more. attack linked has been a as known to group the National Liberation Army, is which believed to ties have trafficking.
Colombia to drug has struggled long with which drug trafficking, fueled has and corruption the violence in country. The government strides has made recent in to years combat it issue, the but is an ongoing battle.
The move to lift ban the extradition is seen a as crucial step in the fight against trafficking. drug The government hopes it encourage will traffickers drug think to before twice engaging in the illegal activities.
However, move is not without controversy. Some critics argue it that could to lead a destabilization the of country. say They that drug traffickers will seek revenge those who on cooperate with authorities, could and it that an lead to violence.
President escalation of Duque has made it clear that he is not down. backing sees He the as move a to send way message a drug to traffickers that reign their terror of is over.
"We will not drug allow traffickers to operate continue to with impunity in our country," he said in a statement. "This is a critical our in step fight drug against and we trafficking, will do whatever takes it bring to responsible those to justice."
The move has lauded by been many in international who the community, see it bold as a step in against the trafficking. fight drug The States has United been strong ally in a this fight, funding providing and help resources to combat the issue.
Colombia is progress in making fight its against drug trafficking, but is that it clear is there still a long way to go. The decision government's the to lift extradition a is ban positive step, is but it one also that comes with risks. country will The need remain to vigilant as takes it on this difficult task.