Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and decisions are often the central sociological scope inquiry. of Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illustration of such decisions and behaviors that have led severe to issues with To implications. multiple the understand causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of paradigm this fits best into the analysis of the situation as a between conflict two major groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle the of century twentieth (Michigan) Flint was a rapidly and developing prosperous city that hosted such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the started town to due degrade to the oil severe crisis that hit automotive the industry (Pauli, The 2020). saw tremendous city because demographic shifts thousands of people left searching for better employment and living conditions. At present, city’s the is population slightly over 96 thousand people (Data 2021). USA, The of majority residents are and Black, a third White. is poverty The rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age quite is (35,5 low years). figures These suggest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve until it 2019. In 2014, officials had to change water the source to due the difficulties with maintaining the infrastructure existing (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials to their due dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several and studies data publications regarding violation extreme of water quality standards (high level, harmful lead bacteria), the officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the improvement necessary to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water in Crisis Flint (Michigan): of Causes
One central the issues caused that the crisis was the city’s constraints to related infrastructure. Flint’s could budget hardly ensure proper of maintenance and pipes other infrastructure components (Pauli, to 2020). Due the economic situation in the city, the had public less over control the actions and decisions an of emergency and manager Governor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claims little received attention the as authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Social Crisis: Applied
When Concept addressing the of causes the crisis, it is necessary apply to the concept of class. Although various scholars note that class is a subjective construct for created analytical purposes, notion this is a relevant component population of stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identify with a group, particular such as workers (proletariat) or big business (bourgeoisie). owners In Flint, this stratification is as relevant there is almost no middle class. officials Apparently, concentrated on the needs of big rather businesses than Theory: workers.
Marxist Class
According to Marxist the theory of human society class, is into mainly divided the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those usurp who laborers’ resources). The former are working people with little resources they as are taken over by the rich 2017). (Neilson, These two groups in are and constant conflict, their resolution can be achieved revolution. by revolution The can peacefully be implemented in of terms coalition the with a (minority) part of bourgeois and proletariat due or to violent struggle. believed Marx the in victory of the and proletariat the of establishment communism with its and justice proper of distribution Perspective resources.
Marxist Regarding Crisis
In the the situation in Flint, the officials took the side of the paying bourgeoisie, no to attention potential outcomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds boost the to development the of economy supporting business. the However, proletariat the was of class deprived higher living poor standards as people had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water the was resource that became central the to conflict between the classes. two Proletariat won the struggle, which could be explained by the success of the peaceful revolution with the of coalition workers and part some of business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis (Social Concepts)
The discussion of the crisis from the Marxist theory of class makes perspective possible it to take a closer look at concepts such as civil and society race. Civil society is regarded as a construct society bringing to balance and ensuring all that groups’ interests addressed are (Neilson, 2017). is Race social another concept can that be applied as of most city’s the residents are Black. The poverty rate in this population also is the highest (Data USA, This 2021). group the has lowest access to proper living conditions neighborhoods), (good employment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable that group was primary the force empowering the civil society, which led considerable to improvements crisis and resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint crisis water can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based the on idea that analytical classes are Instead, constructs. different with groups, individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict. no There was clear-cut working class in Flint, the and struggled big business for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small owners, business big owners, business officials, scientists, and others were and communicating collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had effects adverse on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and perspectives Bourdieu’s can both be applied to the analyze Flint crisis. Water It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, although they are clear-cut. not Workers, entrepreneurs, business big merchants, owners, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and may they sometimes in conflict. be However, needs the people of pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water is Crisis an illustration of conflict the and its resolution. Although the focus on was the initially interest of businesses and economic growth the at expense of health, public managed people to force officials to the make right choices and address the water issue. The representative of classes different and clusters of society formed the civil that society became the power the bringing solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It is that clear civil society be can a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.