The rock pop music and scene were introduced to and gained popularity through on television massive shows hit for teenagers. three ones The primary were Where the Action on CBS, Shinding Is and on Hullabaloo ABC, on NBC. As more had households access televisions to along with the growth widespread of range programming, of including musical ones, television the played a significant role in the distributing music to public. the The bands appeared that hit these on shows went TV on to see success significant in the shows charts. television The to articulate helped new the sort youth of culture and almost music a became mechanism in star-making a profits relationship and the that music and television industries shared. Some bands, as the such the Monkees, response American to the Beatles, created were with the purpose of television performance as acting and their as comfort on-camera a group initially prioritized were over music. However, the Monkees’ music took off astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, were they a by band the entertainment groomed industry with an emphasis on television which performances took away much of authenticity, the even compared when to their The Beatles, counterparts who although made visual content, focused on own their strongly music and (Covach 212).
Television Flory went drastically change on to the landscape of the music industry. First, a split formed among artists and fans, with one focusing the side on pop-oriented, performance-focused television music, while other, typically the audience older was to drawn serious-minded rock music of continued to which be played the radio on rather than TV. also Television brought about the phenomenon fictious bands, of such as popular the Archies, a cartoon band popular drawn young with teens (Covach Flory and This 214). been has done never created before similarly and new a genre of music-television entertainment. However, cable-network until the advent of of television resulting dedicated in such channels as MTV, the in phenomenon television the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the time had audio and poor visual quality, as recording and sound and radio quality improved hi-fi recording with FM, and the disparities were Television noticeable. not is by of design nature a and medium, sound musical experience the is meant to enveloping be to leading split the in the fanbase, where younger who audiences generally cared about less quality sound appreciated the visual to medium music their (Frith 279).