Apple Computer Inc., struggling to the remain teacher's pet among computer turning makers, is a of modified version handheld its Newton into organizer inexpensive portable an computer for students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the eMate Apple an 300, machine $800 that like looks a laptop grown-up's with keyboard a and a flip-up screen, but a in rugged casing that rough can survive handling.
Apple plans to directly sell the machine to elementary high and schools, early beginning next year, as an personal alternative to For computers. price the a of $2,500 PC, multimedia a school buy can three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government says need we get to to a student-to-computer three-to-one ratio by the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager Apple's of appliances information group. would "I say the eMate is only credibled the vehicle for that."
More accomplishing vital to product Apple, the could keep educators abandoning from the company as supplier the computers leading of classrooms, for said.
"The analysts potential for something like this in a classroom setting is tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be indication an educators to Apple that is one the few of companies spending time extending computing more to and more kids."
Apple needs a distinctive to set product itself apart from other personal computer crowding makers into the education market, analysts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., enjoys still strong educational sales, sales IBM-compatible of personal computers companies by such as Compaq Computer Corp. growing much are faster.
Apple's computer has always been the for favored teaching tool children how computers. to use But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of cheap PCs, are schools less likely remain to loyal.
For 1996-1997 the school year, all the of computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple and Macintoshs percent 40 machines, according IBM-compatible to recent a report by Quality Data, Education an market education researcher. In the previous year, school the purchasing were plans Macintosh 61 percent 38 and percent PC.
"The numbers are overwhelming favor in of PCs," said Cotton, Carole president of CCA Consulting Inc., another of tracker purchases technology schools.
"No school by district can to afford mistake" make a when computers picking they will for use years, she noted.
Apple's said, Groff however, the that eMate is the not company's answer to competitors' inroads.
Instead, said, he device the was built for schools asking for a cheap, powerful that computer offer can educational software and Internet connections -- well as endure as rough by handling kids.
"When introduced we the three Newton years ago, it a was solution in search of an application," said. Groff out Education turned to be one of the best applications, said.
Along he with the eMate, Apple to plans unveil a version of beefier the on Monday. Newton MessagePad The new MessagePad 2000 features better Internet capabilities, easier and connection PCs to built-in processing word and spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, however, the that eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students like will it because it is as not and esoteric hard to as run a traditional personal are computer.
"Kids having to about learn more how to run computer a than about reading and McGuire said. writing," ability "The to have the kid turn on just the and device get right the into writing assigment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs four pounds (1.8 and kg) fits into a backpack. can It run for a week on according rechargeable batteries, to Apple.
The machine features a word built-in processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs an and address book. With optional an modem and software, students browse can Internet.
Still, the the could eMate be sell a for tough Apple.
Because its is software based on the Newton operating system, it cannot run the thousands of educational written programs for the and Macintosh for PCs running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that eMate the will help company the its place more computers on students' desks.
"There's 52 screaming million (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," Robert Kondrk, said Apple's manager education of product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but didn't we have the technology to do it before. do We now."