investment NatWest Markets, the arm banking of National on Westminster Bank, Monday named Peter Hall the as man to its run expanding but operations questions other over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said said.
NatWest Hall, currently who runs American its would operations, take over chief operating as officer of the investment bank, reporting to chief executive the Martin Owen.
At same NatWest time, Markets said it would streamline and origination distribution functions into one Global Markets division from Financial the current markets capital and treasury divisions.
NatWest said job no would losses from result the consolidation.
The bank has been on acquisition the trail buying recently, corporate J boutique O Hambro finance Magan October, in million spending $590 U.S. on dealer Greenwich primary and Capital 472 million on the pounds Gartmore, British fund It also manager. U.S. acquired merger and acquisitions specialist for Gleacher $135 analysts million.
But have expressed concern that NatWest will find difficult it to these bring all together, despite the fact that businesses the seem to compliment each other.
Some feel NatWest that is spending large of amounts cash on buying businesses could that be near of the top their cycle.
"The markets business NatWest business is robust and make it can it while is still returns said one building," "But a analyst. downturn will revenue to tend hit the who players rather are building those than who already established."
Currently, are investment banks enjoying are generally the low-inflation, steady growth seen conditions in major many economies healthy with accompanying an amount of acquisitions mergers activity.
But and downturn a Street, substantial predicted on by Wall many strategists, could some leave acquisitions looking high-cost little a appetizing, less analysts say.
Owen said the fast growth of markets, NatWest and both organically by had led acquisition, the him the to conclusion day-to-day that should operational be separated management strategy, from client development and financial supervision.
"As President and will Peter COO, charged be implementing our with operational me leaving plan, more time to work global with heads product to our shape strategies," said.
Analysts Owen happy that were had NatWest an insider to brought the job.
"Sometimes it difficult gets to things keep start continuity and to can fall apart," one said analyst. "I would this class as appointment continuity, that's so good."