Corp., Lear furthering its quest to complete supply car said interiors, it agreed to Friday the instrument buy panel and trim of parts unit Holding Denmark-based AB.
Lear Borealis said signed it a memorandum of understanding to acquire Borealis AB Industrier undisclosed terms.
Based for in Sweden, Gothenburg, Borealis manufacturers Industrier door instrument panels, panels, climate systems, trim and exterior other components various for the European truck car and industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 $230 sales of about million and owns five in plants Sweden that employ about 1,800 people.
Primary customers for business Swedish the AB include Volvo carmakers and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis is Holding owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group  Neste Oy and Norwegian oil state-owned group AS.
Completion Statoil the of transaction is subject to approval by Swedish the authority competition and conditions.
Lear other said the acquisition supports strategy its of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including only instrument panels.
"Not does this strengthen acquisition relations our with European customers, but it positions as the Lear independent only supplier automotive world in the with in-house all capabilities five in -- interior systems broadening appeal the of our already strong competitive one-stop-shopping advantage," Lear Chairman Way Kenneth said in a statement.
The deal is the latest of a series consolidation of moves in the automotive interior market. earlier Lear year this purchased carpet and floor-mat maker for Corp. Masland $384 and year million, bought last door and panel console maker Automotive Inc for $626 Industries million.
Lear's U.S. include operations the manufacturing of a wide automotive range of company's interior was stock components.
The unchanged $38 Friday at share a the New on Stock York competitors Exchange.
Lear's are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls has Inc., strong a which business, seating recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., $1.35 billion for cash.
Canada's in Magna International of Inc., one "Big the Three" automotive firms interior along Lear with Johnson and seat Controls, recently Douglas acquired maker & Lomason for Co. million. $135