In grand the scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violent crimes natural are prosecutors The allies. strive to the bring offenders justice, to whether to fulfill duty their before the or law achieve progress. career At the same the victims time, moral get when satisfaction the criminals brought are justice. to Therefore, one think might that prosecutors victims and naturally supposed are to cooperate. However, scenario this logical does happen necessarily practice. not in the victims Sometimes, cannot cooperate with prosecutors adequately the due the to experienced shock, or mistreatment in fear, the During prosecutor’s office. mid-70s, the Law the Assistance Enforcement Administration funded the first Victim/Witness Projects in Assistance order (VWAPs) to enhance cooperation the between offices prosecutors’ and (Karmen, victims time, 2019). With the VWAPs become firmly have institutions established charged with the noble mission of supporting crime offices victims.
Prosecutor can assist the victims of violent crimes through various The means. best practices include help psychological in hotlines and crisis shelter, food, counseling, transportation, and recovery property (Karmen, 2019). addition, In to VWAPs most make referrals local agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (Karmen, Furthermore, 2019). prosecutor offices legal offer through pamphlets assistance about the Finally, adjudication process. VWAPs mitigate confusion notifying by the victims about indictments, postponements, convictions, and acquittals, other developments possible in the (Karmen, 2019). case As such, modern prosecutor the are offices equipped well ensuring the for through victims’ cooperation psychological, legal, and financial support.
The even Diego San County District Attorney’s Office as serves a specific example of well-rounded services a victim project. The Assistance Victim offers Program (crisis emergency legal intervention), (court the support, orientation criminal in justice and psychological system), assistance) (referral help (San Diego County Attorney, District n.d.). In addition, victims of violent crimes may special receive for reimbursement eligible from losses the Compensation Victim Board, is funded which by restitution (San Diego fines District County Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements such cover losses medical as expenses, security improvements, or home treatment, outpatient mental among others. crime in Overall, victims County the San of Diego can rely on decent support from District Attorney’s their office.