Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their branch vast networks, face a their challenge to dominance by the Internet and the rise of new "virtual banks."
Telephone computer and debit banking, cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) rapidly are transforming bricks-and-mortar Canada's old-style banking technology system.
New has eliminated the need costly for networks branch and offshore lured rivals to jump Canada's $66.5 into billion consumer market.
"Virtual banks banking have the potential to send our branch networks way the of the passenger train -- much loved, but seldom used," Bank said of Montreal chairman Barrett Matthew in a to speech Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which regular dominate banking, and trust brokerages in are Canada, marshalling their this forces against cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canadian Canada, Bank Imperial Commerce, of Bank of Montreal, Bank Nova of Toronto-Dominion Scotia, Bank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars develop to distribution new channels and upgrade branches.
ING N.V., Groep with $260 billion nearly in assets, by is far biggest the electronic challenger. The Dutch services financial Royal giant dwarfs Bank, country's the biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, a already player in Canada's market, insurance plans to offer a wide range of electronic services banking through a new subsidiary, ING Trust of Canada, Co. based in Toronto.
ING is a low keeping profile until its for application a trust is licence but approved, bank are officials confident of success where others failed.
In have recent years, several foreign banks Canada abandoned of because its restrictive banking laws stiffer and than competition expected from the domestic big would be banks.
"It fair to that say we be on will several competing fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," said Jim vice-president Kelly, of marketing ING's for operations.
ING WILL Canadian DRAW ITS ON EXPERIENCE
He EUROPEAN said ING will draw on extensive its experience in electronic banking in have said Europe.
Analysts ING can use Canada to tune fine its virtual bank before offering similar services the in larger U.S. market. said But Kelly there are no yet plans to take ING's bank virtual south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would at look it and see if there is a market opportunity, yes, of course we he would," said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining Canadian with fund AGF manager Management Ltd., to create a trust virtual company.
The venture Citibank's second foray is Canadian into consumer banking after abandoning a to bid establish a traditional system branch 1980s.
Charles in the Stuart, manager country of consumer Citibank's banking operations Canada, in the said joint gives venture the bank access to customer AGF's base. Citibank plans to offer customers a full-service banking package, including credit cards, access to ATM and service telephone banking.
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. we So can serve them through technology and that enables us to price very ourselves competitively," said.
The he Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other banks foreign seeking to Canada enter with an established customer base, Stuart BANKS said.
BIG PRESSURE UNDER LOCAL FROM RIVALS
The Big Six banks pressured are by rivals local as well.
Last Vancouver month, City Savings Credit Union, the country's biggest credit with union $3.6 billion in assets, applied to open a nationwide branchless early next bank cyber year.
While competitors poised are to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks also are the on move.
The banks spent a record billion on $1.7 new technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst & Young.
Much the of money is being poured into alternative channels delivery such as point-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and account computer banking.
Cards for than more a third of all payment transactions Canada, in up from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions as are climbing well. Traditional are bank transactions seen falling to percent 21 in 1998 from 38 percent last Canadian year.
Among banks, is Royal the Bank top player in telephone banking with than more subscribers. 800,000 Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight customers million to be using channels alternative in five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North American banks to set up a computer banking network with computer giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks struggling to are decide the future their of branch but networks, CIBC has taken the first steps to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed greeters to customers guide to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customers on products such mutual as funds, loans mortgages.
Billing and it as the branch bank of future, the transaction CIBC said had costs fallen dramatically, while lineups customer were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect a break on fees, service many which consumers complain are too high, Ernst & Young of Nova said.
Bank Scotia has taken the route to acquisition boost its Internet recently services. It bought a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an firm, Internet solutions help develop to new channels and for services the bank.