Two years ago, China's second telephone network set to out challenge the Posts powerful of Ministry and Telecommunications and (MPT) competition bring the into country's fast-growing a market.
But the fledgling has network hard found to it tackle a seasoned -- competitor one that also is the market regulator.
"Are they MPT) (the supposed to the be referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li president Huifen, China of Telecommunications United Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for long-suffering China's telephone subscribers, often who had to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only tiny slice a of the market as its entrenched competitor has kept tight a grip on telecommunications sector, the using its regulatory clout to the slow upstart network's have advance.
"They delayed interconnections won't and give us telephone numbers for our customers," said Li in an "We interview. need a law telecommunications give to legal us a framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers the of project the were ministries of electronics industry (MEI), and power railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The has MEI with manufacturing muscle a corps of factories telecommunications producing equipment. But it the feared MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it of out the market unless had it its captive own other customers.
The partners key private had networks telecommunications spare with while capacity, MPT's the public network was overcrowded.
The heavily feud between the Chinese rival government was camps bitter, often sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business the with new were with network threatened blacklisting by the MPT, according Western to industry sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still an took from order the State or Council, network cabinet, for promised interconnections emerge.
China to expects have to more than million 60 telephone lines installed the by of end this -- year adding a breathtaking 10 million 1996 in alone. The total is likely top to 100 million by the turn of the century, still a only of small segment nation's 1.2 the people.
MPT billion says it be should not considered a competitor to Unicom because has it separate a operating arm called China 1993, Telecom.
"Since we separated have making policy from business operations by creating China Telecom," an MPT said spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating competing," he and said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical BE problems.
STRUGGLE TO China Telecom IMPARTIAL
But officials concede it is hard to say where one entity and ends other begins. the And even if can they draw the line cleanly, MPT the must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always they say are being fair," said Li. Unicom's "But China Telecom is own their and child, are parents partial to always their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in becoming August, the third president in the company's history. brief was She tapped from her as job deputy mayor of big the of industrial city Tianjin to put clout political behind the second network.
The company started telephone with mobile services, first in the big cities of Beijing, and Shanghai, Tianjin Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to cities. 16 It has made its greatest Shanghai inroads in it where has about mobile phone 20,000 customers, said.
"In Li years 10 we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One success clear has been mobile in bringing telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - compared $1,200) with 10,000 20,000 to yuan Unicom before came along.
Li says Unicom on is profitable its operations, excludes but heavy that investments building in network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has advantage. one Foreigners not are permitted to telecommunications operate networks in China, many and give foreign firms Unicom capital in for return a share of the income.
That least will at the growing ease pains the for infant network, analysts said.