Canada's six biggest banks are poised for a further round profits of buoyant when begin they reporting third-quarter Tuesday, earnings setting the stage for a third consecutive year, record said.
An analysts improved interest picture, rate higher investment banking and dealing revenues and better loan quality expected are to drive profits the in third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Six are Big expected to be 15 percent 20 to percent higher than the third quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I expect would sectors more of banks the be to more profitable than they were in the corresponding quarter of year," said last Roy an Palmer, analyst TD with Securities.
Bank Montreal of and Bank of Scotia, Nova Canada's third- banks, and fourth-largest respectively, kick the off earnings on parade Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the National smallest, Bank of Canada, report Thursday.
The on country's top banks, two Royal Bank of Canada Imperial and Canadian of Bank Commerce, are to scheduled deliver their Sept. results 5.
Despite a recent downturn in markets, financial analysts said securities earnings should be stronger than last year. brokerage Canada's is by dominated industry of the subsidiaries major countries are banks.
The also banks expected to from benefit loan lower losses as the continues industry rebound to disastrous from loans in estate, commercial which real in collapsed 1980's.
Despite the late in correction stocks the this earlier bank summer, stocks have remained strong Canadian performers. Lower have interest push helped rates bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability up couples lower with interest then rates, it will probably set the backdrop for share prices," higher said Susan an Cohen, analyst with Deacon Corp.
Analysts Capital said they do not any expect of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the of end the fiscal year.
The banks big are on a track for third straight of year profits. record annual The group up rang combined profit a of C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 31, up C$4.25 from billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he a expects modest increase in profits.
"Investment banking is a cyclical business. It may tail off but a bit, there is no of sign recession a yet, I so would we think could earnings get modestly higher next year," he of said.
Bank Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of 97 Canadian cents (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cents (67.9 Canadian cents) per share year a ago, according figures supplied by to International the Estimates Brokers Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are climbing seen to C$1 (73 cents) per share in the third up quarter, 86 from cents Canadian (62.8 a share.
Toronto-Dominion cents) Bank expected is to a post cents 72 (52.5 Canadian cents) per share profit, up slightly from cents 71 (51.8 Canadian cents) per share in the quarter third Bank's of 1995.
National third quarter earnings are forecast to 41 rise to cents Canadian cents) from (29.9 share per 33 cents cents) (24.1 Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third results quarter are at pegged ($1.04) C$1.42 a share compared to last C$1.13 year's ($82 per cents) share.
Royal Bank of Canada seen is improving to 96 Canadian cents cents) (70 a share in the third quarter, up 88 from cents (64.2 Canadian cents) share per year earlier. a