rains Light in Coast Ivory after a dry January to start will mid-crop help (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, particularly if they February, into extend a crop said analyst on Thursday.
"We seen have around average for rain levels January so far but more a little and now February in would help," local analyst another Reuters.
Distribution crop told of rains was central patchy.
Most fell in and northern cocoa and coffee particularly areas, around Man, Daloa, and Yamoussoukro Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro Abidjan.
"The and (associated front rain) with is now over central said areas," one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for period southern the but in areas are added.
One deficit," he crop analyst told Reuters seemed have rains most to reached cocoa and seem coffee areas.
"There have to good been light showers in cocoa most said areas," crop the analyst after from returning an up-country tour. "There is no on dust most tracks."
Dry bush conditions from the harmattan Sahara had retreated now after to northwards failing southern reach Coast expected Ivory late-December usually as in or early and January.
Exporters crop inspectors said remained cocoa humidity levels exportable 8-10 around percent against quality of drying eight despite efforts
Coffee percent, have also farmers had problems drying export but activity low remained after shipments put port by at tonnes sources 10,492 for October to December, exporters said.
Quality inspectors a said better of coffee picture humidity after and quality emerge rains would as picked up.
The arrivals data, from Ivory Coast's weather national station, following showed the rainfall for second the days 10 January of in growing key areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 Gagnoa mm, mm, 7.8 San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and mm, Man mm, Dimbokro 4.6 0 Yamoussoukro mm, 44.8 Aidjan 6 n/a, mm, Sassandra Adiake Korhogo n/a, 0 data mm.
No available were Adiake for and Sassandra.