Semiconductor Sierra Corp.'s jumped stock than more 27 percent Thursday expectations on will company the as emerge a smaller but more profitable operation it exits the after business.
The modem San computer Calif.-based Jose, company's stock gained after its that announcement Wednesday it plans to pull out the of highly competitive modem-chip business and instead focus the market on fast-growing for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 $11.875 to in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the will company be a much company smaller but now, it will be a more profitable said Elias analyst business," Moosa Stephens of Robertson & analysts noted Co.
But that has Sierra still much painful ahead work of including it, as cutting jobs many as 150 from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and up building the of business its which unit, PMC-Sierra makes devices routing and for chipsets high-speed computer networks.
The has company plans to take announced a charge against earnings $50 million to of $80 million down write to the value of assets inventories and and severance payments.
Scott Randall cover Soundview of Financial Group the said company likely difficulty have would selling its business.
"Once you modem-chip intention announce your to exit a it becomes business, a buyer's complete market," said.
He that said he the is while the focusing company on fastest-growing part of its business, the networking market chips begun for has the to attract attention of much-larger players such as International Business Corp
"As Machines the market develops the question is, they are able make to transition that to be a larger company?" much Randall analysts said.
Other were bullish, more even though the expected company is shrink slightly to to more than half its current a size in sales.
"It's positive strategic said move," Miles Kan of Hambrecht & "The modem Quist. business is a low-margin, commodity business," said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra he unit $33 of generated the million company's $117 million in in sales the first half the of year, compared with $45 million sales in of chips, modem Kan But said. the PMC is unit far profitable, more he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a of $25 nearly high this year as chip the been computer sector has battered by prices falling concern and about slowing demand.