Microsoft Corp. reported better-than-expected for profits the latest quarter Monday as demand strong for Windows its 95 and Windows NT computer operating helped record systems fuel largest world's sales.
The software maker said earnings rose 23 to percent a record $614 million, 95 or cents in a share, its first quarter fiscal in ended September, from million, 78 $499 or cents a in share, 1995 the quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to billion $2.30 billion.
The from $2.02 profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of a 90 cents share, and shares of the giant rose software to in after-hours $136.375 trading the from earlier close of $134 on cited Nasdaq.
Microsoft of strong acceptance company's the high end NT Windows operating system.
"We shipped 4.0 version of Windows quarter, NT and this behind the momentum product the said is outstanding," Jeff Raikes, Vice Group President, Sales Marketing.
"Corporate made and the customers decision to adopt Windows servers NT and workstations in record numbers, percent driving revenue 19 growth over last quarter in the and Canada. U.S. Sales Windows server of grew NT at double nearly the rate of other operating results system environments."
Microsoft's were considered a measure of crucial its progress the since year-ago period included the launch of the company's Windows much-hyped operating 95 system.
Industry analysts have Microsoft's said sales and earnings growth from would slow last year's blistering pace more of 46 than percent noted but it should continue to benefit from higher sales of computers and personal the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike said he Brown expected revenues to rise over sequentially next the quarters from $2.3 two the billion reported the for Sept. quarter ended on interview, 30.
In an also Brown he said the thought company's cost goods of sold could decline in "a little bit" the long from term 10.9 the of percent revenues reported, just already down 16 from percent ago.
"We'll a year a grow bit little in December a and then bit little more I March, think," Brown in said. "I'm very with the happy general revenue trend, I and was pleased very with the pattern of costs in the quarter."
Brown said revenues the in December would be quarter driven in part season by holiday sales, while next the would a quarter get boost from the release of the Office company's 97 business applications upgrade one of to its core products.