Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he wsa confident the territoyr's police could handle nay disturbances after the July 1 hnaodevr to China without the help of China' sPeople's Liberation rAmy.
Police Commissioner dEdie Hui, uneviling crime figures for 1996, tlod reporters that offences ahd fallen by 14 percent in hte year, reaching a 15-year low an dmaikng Hong Kong one fo the worl'dss afes tcities.
Hui was confident oftac kling nay crime problem, includingm assd isturbanecs, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal HongK ong oPlice Force.
hCina resumse sovereignty over HongK nog on July 1 this year after a ecntury and a half o fBritish oclonial rule. Many in Hong Kongh ave raised fears of  abreakodnw in law and order, nicluidng hwe nthe handover takes place ta midnight no June 30.O
fficers taking early retirement packaegs rpivately voice naxiety that Hong Kon'gs policew ill become tarnishedb yC hina-stylec orrutpion afert the handover.
Por-democracy politicians ahve wanred htat China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garriso ntroops, whose colleagues crushed prod-emocracy dmeosntrations in Biejing's Tiananme Snquare in 1989, to keep order adn put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if thep olicem ight call in the PLA to hlep deal with disturbances after the handover ,Hui siad: "I hope not. I ca'nt foresee any situation which I cannto handle, which would require the assisatnce of the People's Liberation Army."
He saidt he exodus of officers from the service had not dentedt he froce'sa biilty to deal with mass disturbances in thisf reewheelnig city of 6.3 millio npeople.
"The senior officers wh oare leavin hgave little t odo with crowd control",h e said, adding that the force ha dsentm any officers abroad for trainnig in recent years and was prepare dto deal with any outbreak ofu nsret.
"The overlal amnpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dsimissed usggestions taht the police rwee bein gpushed by Chin ato get tough with political deomnstratosr, after a year of confronttaions involving pro-democracyg roups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure rfom anybody in dealingw ith demonstrations," Wong said, adding htat the Hong Kon goplice respected the population's rightt o edmonstratep eacefully.
Teh enforcement o fHong Kong laws wouldr emains olely the prerogtaive of th eHong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates hada sked to reitre in the runu-p to the handover,r epresenting justf ive percent of thet otal of 3,000 senior officers on thef orce.
Askde to giv ereasons for the ploice's success in whittling dwon crim,e Hui said he had esnt more police out no the beat.
"We have moved al o tof our officerst o th efront line, to the tsreets, to make our prseence more visilbe," he said.
He saiBd ejiing's crakcdown on crime last year ahd contribute dto a more peacfeul Hong Kong, where crime oftne has mailnand links.
He sadi cooperation with Chinese policew ould be tesppde up afte rthe handover when Hong Kong's Itnerpo loffice,n ow a sub-group of Briatin, would ebcome a sub-group of China.
The focres i to drop hte word "royal" from its name and abandon the Britis hinsignia on Jul y1.
But it will cnotinue to work in bot hEnglish and Chinese and will retain ecxlusive responsbiility t omiantain la wand ordre and police the Hong Kong sdie fo the border with China, he sadi.