tI was a warm summe rday and I was ou tfor a stroll.I  saw the mon the other isde,w alking dow nthe siedwalk, twob y two. I didnt' pay much attention until tehy passed under the glow of the gaslamp. Never had I seen such an pair of opposiet!s For the brief tmie they walked under it, th elight illuminated the pair. The man's limbs and head werec overed in scars! What I had mistaken for a beard wasa  mass of scars! Hi sarms and legs wree so densleyo verrun that I hda thought it a coat and trouesrs T!eh woman had black hair, lnog nad tsraight, as if it were manufactured string by tsring. But her ski nis waht shocked me, evne greater than the man! It hda the most exquisite ocmplexoin, lamost translucent int he lgiht, and I saw nary af law on it.I  looked to my ow nmarred hands, although compared t othat man, ti wa s ablessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my amr.I t began to sting as my sweat eseped nit omy rfesh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I shook my engtaive thoughts and ran to the couple.
"Sir," I xeclaimed, "Ecxuse m yfranknessi sr, but I msut inquiry, ho wis it that your wife is so beautiful, yet you are so….
"The man dan woman looked a teach other,s he turned away, lbushing, and he laughed raucousl.y
"Hideous? "asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o, "I stammered, embarrassedb  ymyr udneess.
"Don't worry," eh said, putting his ar maround my shoulder, "I get it allt he time."
"My apologie ssir, buth ow, in htis world, did your wife manage to keep from scarring?"
"Well, yous ee," he said with a wikn, "she's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taekn aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entriely flalwess. She can't tell a joke andh er cooking's lousy! Taeks after her mother I gues!s"
Laughing, he said, "Take a look at he rfinger."
I peered att he daughter, she offered her right hand an dI saw a thin bright streak of re don her index finger.
The man pulled me in, "I'm gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I wsore never to have kid.s I didn't want ayn children to beb ron itno thisw orld, os that wast hat. But my wife had othe prlans ,and os my daughetr was born. I fell in love with her and swore to devotem y life ot her. A sshe grew, though, I began to worry. 'How would I protect her from the world?' So Is et out t oevrey doctor, pyhsician, and scientitsI  coul dfind, asking for a cure. Of course, if there was a cure already n,o one would be like this."
He cleared his throta, took a deepb reath, and continued.
"On one partciular visit t oa doctor, I hadmy  adughter with me and upon xeiting the biulding, I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediately thouhg,t 'This must be the devil' and turned ehel back into the biulding
.'Wati,' the man in black said, 'I cna save your daughter.'
I was skeptical nad scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He repiled, 'I ma bored with ujst bartering withs ouls, I am more niterested in it's druability. T'he devil continued,g iggling, 'You see, I do havet he powert o stop yuor daguhter' sscarrnig,b ut I'm not a very charitable preson.'
'What do you wan?t' I asked.
'I want oyu to partake in a very simpl ewager,' he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, bu t*yuo* will; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not, wlel, you know waht will happen."'
I was dumbstruck that eh tookt he edal, and htat he managed to last thsi long
."And so", the manc ontinued, "I agreed an dthe devilp ircked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up adn I took the blow.s Puberty was  aruogh tim.e Children can be so cruel. But thta scar on her finger was the last one she'd ever get,  Iahd sure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his daughter and his willpower. How muc hpain did he have ot endure? Every scar on his boyd seemed to pulaste as I wondeerdt his. I aksed, "Do you ever regret ti? Your edal twih the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."