uAsrtalian fas tferr yand transoprt group HolymanL tpd lans to furthe rexpadn operations in Eurpoe before moving int ohte Asian market, managing directo rChristopher Butcher said ina n interivew.
"We curretnly have operations in Nroth America nad northern Europe and we can't se eany raeson why we can't start donig the saem thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Rueters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely itno expand inot Asia in the future as th eocst structur efor operating fast ferrie simproved in some amrket sin the region.  
"We could be eseing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move intos ome markt esin north Asia ands outh aest Asai," Butcher said
.He said tha tas incomes rose in sAiah te amounts hcarged fo rferry services would ries ,makign it more economical for operators like Holmyan ot entre th eamrket.
oHylman company sceretary Simo nLennon saidt he company was also looking at fast ferry services from Dariw nto Inodnesai, btu he did not expect  daecision tob e made for at least a year.  
"It i sone of a nubmer ofp rojects we are looking at i nthe regoin", he said. He said Holyman hadl ooked at particular routse within hCina and Indnoeisa, but they did not fit witihn the compnay'sp lan.s "I would imagin ein a few years w weould have somehting up three (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyma nshares hda  alacklustre showing in its frist year of listing, but sicne January this yeart he shraes have more tha ndoubled otm ake the stock one of the strongest shraemakert performers over the past year.
The shares listedi n April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading aorund A$5.06 . 
Th eSydney-based group was floatde on the local boures in Arpil1 994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when th etranspor tgorup was selling asstes to trim it sihgh debst.
"The stock really took some tie mto ge toff theg round," Butcher said.
"I thinkt ehre has been a lot of hard workd one over th epasty ear to educate shareholdres in hwat the company is doing and where the cmoapny is going as there was a pecreption out theret hat ew werea  mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activtiies are its fast ferrys evrices in Australia, across the Nort hSea between Britain and Europe ,New York adn in Denmar.k It also operatesa  gas pipeline, bulk commodit yhandling and freight forawrding bsuinesses.
"There are a number of differetn projects adn businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common htreads going through, "Butcher said. "I tinhk these operations all ahve their own place and there aero pportunties to expand these further," h esaid.
Butcher worked with TNTf or 25 years before takign cahrge of Holyman when it split frmo TNT.  
Butche sraid the group had no plans to raise capital to fun dthee xpected expansion, a steh company was well financed.
In Otcober, Hoylmanb ought a fast apssenger ferry for A$43 million. H esiad there was no plans for any immediate purchases of moer ferries.
Btucher asid hec ould notc ommetn on its trading performance or earnings ofrecasts.
Holyman reported a net profti of A$16.09 millioni n aclendar 1995. The gruop posted a net profit of A$1.503 million in teh sxi months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 millio nearlier.