eDar Dair,y I nkow its beena  while btu pelsaef orgive me. Earlier tdoay when wakling home from school I had a srtange, no,t he strangestt hing that has ever aphpened to me happenedt oady andI  am totally fraeking otu. I was crossing Suqash Creek on the nroth bridgeli ke I do erveyday aftrec lass. But tshi time when I aprpoacehd th eon rmap I noticed a small wooden stool sitting in the path.i t awsn' tuntil I tried wakling aroundi t did I notic ethe..thing, I don't know what to cal lit a otrll maybe? Yea,h a troll that makes sense. I met a troll today. At first I though it was soem crud ecreatio nof seom meth tweakers made fo dead cats adn fish but then hits harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I was os taken back that If ell on my as sright htere. If ont fort hat I would have been out of there isntantly,a n dthe fact that this tihng started to speak to me.." Easy there young-en!" it saidin  a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry?" Naturally I answered it. I spoke back ot teh "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying toc ross ehre, I do it alomst every day." It was silen tfor a moment after that htne replide "Yous ee son,t hisi s my bridge now"! "And you rcoss it onm y terms". He stuck some sort of crooked acne ni myf ace as I starettd o get up to my feet. Y"ou must answer ym riddle" he choked otu with a laugh. Thisw ast he point wher eI was convinced I had gone basoltuely bokners. I litreally ipnche mdyself which only aided in his laughtre. "What time is it when an elephant sits on you rfence"? eh said in a lsow majestic ovic.eH ow was I supposedt o know thta? Itw as rpobably some ancientp rover bor great life lesson I hda never heard of..I tried reasnoingw iht the thignb ut it wuolnd't have any. I had to answe ri.t.otherwise  Iwould have to wakl four mielst o the other crossing. Yaeh right. I sat there for about twenty mintues watching ti sho ofleis away until I had stetled on an answer .ti never toldm e what would happen fi I was wrong in my reply...I oepned mym out hto speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on uyor fence"?I  repeated." Itst ime to buya  new fence" Is aid ocfnidently. The torlls fcae showed no emotoin until he udsdenly reupted in laughter, he even fell off his sutpid stol.o Was I rigth I thought to myself. I then decided that whiel he mocks my rwong answre I wasn't giogn to take ayn of taht. I rna.  rIna fastan d didn't turn back. Now 'Im recroding it all.S hould I tell my paertns? Waht if it followed em?W asm y answer right? Im' not evne sure it catually happened..