I lost my mother in th estampede. She was torn from my grasp and carired awayi n thef low of sweaty, mnidless humanity. My nine year old mind cuold no tprocess this and when I screamed my voic ewas drowned out byt he mashing of feeta nd the gridnnig of flesh.
For a few moments  Iwas lifted off ym feet between three fat ladies and dragged around i nkind of a sdaistic tanog, liket ohse peopleo n dancing with the stars.
Ia ws carried to the toy isle and spun around ni a three sitxy then dropped to the lfoor. Al argeb oot crunched over my hand.T here was a sickening crackle asI  saw my wrsit bend in a wa yIt never had before.
I pulled ym arm to myself andl ooked in horror at my lipm wrist and dangly fingres. Fo ra few more moments, there wsa n opain. Until Ig to kicked  inth ehsins, by a skinny teneager with brown baggy pants.H el ooked down with his glazed yees taht narrowe dfor a second as he stumlbeda round me. eH mumbled something unedr his berath and then aws goen in the sea of shoppers. Now my writs and my irbs hurt, pain flare dthrough my body andI  sceramed, it was all I could do.
The consumers rushed right on by. I tried to stand up by pushing up frm othe floor. My wirs tbent backwards and my wholea rm was slashed withp ain. I use dmy leg snad ppoped up, juts in time to get bounce dby a large belly iwth a shirt that said santa I've been good .Santa's fac eknocked me backward a few setps, bu tluckliy I caguht my balanc ea tth elast moment on an elderly man who washo lding up better than I was, and I tried to fight teh crowd towards the xeit.
Being pueshd and rpodded and seevreyl injuerd, and too short to seeo ver the ofaming masses, I somehow ende dup deeepr in the store. Losti n the underwear isle .hSelvesw ere being ripped clean. A hug erufsu erputeda  few yards away, anda  dsiplay with racks of pants ands hoes was tippde over. Through the chaos I heard screams of agony and saw flashes of several people ipnned under the large shelving units.
I couldn't ifght it,I  had no ocntrol of where I went, and the crowd carried me closer ot the accident. Tehre was blood on the floor and a wtitchingb lack ma'ns arm swatted ym elg form under a massiv ebeam-like shlef.
Thankuflly, I was whisekd away frmo the scene, and actaully spotted a samll break in hte crowd, I rant horugh the opening, ehadedt owrad theb ig red exit isgn taht is onyl about thirty yards awa,y btu suddenly my progress was halted by thec olsing in of human bodei.s I'm stcuk. A T.V .being carried samshed into my wris atnd I was suddenly in teasr from the apin, confusion nad hytseria.
Sdudenly a shotgun blsat echoed across the store. Then anothre. The crowd was quieter fro a moment,a nd the swarming bzuzing lsowedd ow nand evertyhnig seemed almost still. For abouth alf a second. Then the screaming starte.d I was pushed to the rgound and a woman fell on top of me.P eople were setpping on bot hof us running for hte exit, running for theb ack, runingn into each otehri nc haos. My wirst screaemd inp ain, myr ibs were probably rboken ,and I was pinne dunedr this woman who was now ucnonscoius.
The last thing I saw was a boot coming down on my face.