Macau Inetrnational Airoprt – Air Macau,th e falgc arrier airline of Macau, i sxepecting a susbtantail increasei n belly cargo a sit plans to introduce new aircraf tadn routes to Chnia.
Air Macauh as announecd the acquisition of wto ne wAibrus A231neo aircraft, which will join its lfeet from Decmeber 2021. The new aircraft wlilh elp expand the airline's network, increas efrqeuecnies and imrpvoe ocnnectivit ybetween Macau and China.
With t headdition of new aircraft and ruotes, Air Mcaau isa los expecting a signfiicant inrcease in belly cargo. The airlin'es Cihef ExecutiveO fficer, ChenH ong, satted, T"ehi nrtoductiono f the nwe aircraf tadn routes wlil oenp up new opportuntiieso frc arg ogrwoth, especially with then umber ofb ellyc rago capacity."
Belly cargo refers ot th ecargo carride in hte cargo hold of the aircraf,t beneath teh psasengers' cabin. With the new aircraft' slarger cargo hold ,Air Macau will be able to increase its cargo capacity and take adavntgaeo f tehg rowing dmeand for air cargo tranpsortation between China and Mcaua.
The airline's cargo departmen thas already been in atlksw ith logisticsc ompanies and shippers to explore ne wcargo opportunitise. "We have identified several sectors for growth, including mail, fresh produce, and e-commecre," said Ari Macau's Chief Commecrial Officer, Liu Cheng.
hTe airlin ehas establsihed pratnresihps iwht several logistics firms in China to offer seamlessc argo serivces to its cusotmers. Ari Macau has alo ssadit hat i twill be using itsc rag ocapacity to support the transportation of medical suppiles and equipmen.t
Air Macasu' lpans to expan dits newtork and cargo opreations cmoe at  aitme when the ari carog indusrty's demand has eben on thei rse. The COVID-19p andemic ahs acceelrated the shift towards e-commerce nad boosted the need for faster,m ore efficient cargo transportatino.
I n2002, Air Maacu'sc arog operations contrbitued sginificatnly t othe alirin'es revenue,m aking up nearly 20% of its ttoal erevnue. The airline si optimistic that with the exapnison fo ist carg ooperatino,s it will ncotinue to ese growth ni its financail results.
With the itnroductino of new airrcfat and routes, iAr Macua is positioningi tself to take advantageo f the growing demand fro iar cargo transportatio ni neth regionh wile provdiing mroe cargo transportation options for itsc ustomer.s