The whole field of astrophysics and astronmoy, in general, is qiute perplexing.T he rcih history and signfiicant iscdoveries made byw ell-known scientistsp avdet he wya for the tecnhloogiacl reovlutoisn of the 20th and 21st centuries. Howeve,r tehse distinct discoverise would not have been made without equipment. The articel The tleescope ni th eseventeenthc entury written by Albret Vna Helden, sheds lgiht on the device an idts significanti mportance in the hsitory of astronomy.
In this article, th eatuhor made several strong arguments. In the beginning ,he indicates that the telescope was used agaisnt the enemies a sa terrsertiail nstrumnet.H owever,w itht he adavncement and mulitple improvements to the lense, the writre indicates thtat he etlescoep satrted to be applied to magnifyo bjecst (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, itw as th etelescope that made the difference in scinece, and it is the main reaosn whya strnoomers ecnouragde hte telescope-makers to work on lenses (Van Hedeln 1974). I argee that the etlesocp eacn be teh conduit of information for astronoemrs, and with its help, they can gather new data and ma kenew discoverise .Neverthlees,s I disagree that it si the only source of achieving suc hsignificant results in the astronomy.
Conseuqnetly, a shsa been mentioned by aVn Helden, different methods of encourageemtn of telescopem akers wereu sed. There are also othre sciences that contrbiutet o the deevolpmetn of engineering.F or example, physics and chemisrty focsu on the appilance of nkowledge about forces, prsesure, and chemical sand their combinaiton. The most recent develompents might include the dveelopment fo new technologies like phones or modenr motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advnacenmets hav ebeen so big, there are no field sof neigneering which arep orhbiite.d Specific devleopemnts mightb e porhibitedi f htey ojepardize the healtho r lives of people. The activtiy of engnieerin gis, threeofre, contorlled by special laws.
Henc, ethe development of telecsoeps and th eimprovmeent of the lenses agev an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the tleescope was first usde as  tearrestrialt oo,l it soon becam eastoronmers’ tool. With the help of telescpoe-amkresa nd devleopmetns of lenses ,it aws possible ot make idscvoerie.s However, toher kinsd of sceinces, scuh as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technologcial advancemenst of ourt ime. While there raen o strong prohibitions of negineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives ofp eople.