The tsark chords fo Tosac begin once again ;Scarpias' motive is the first thing the audience at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they are jade dbyi t,b ut it tsill elicist iwthin me feelings from a bygone lif.e Soo wne'l lese entrances from Cavaradossi adn fo course our ledaign lady, Tosca, forced to do the unpseakable adn murder one ma nto try adn save another's lif.e Poor Tosca; ifo nly she had knonwt hat Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution ,perhapss he would have accepted Scarpia's demand for intmiacy.
The people will then hsuffel out o fht eopera theatre, lazily critiquing the smaes how taht the'yve seen entirely oto often here in Milan ,and go out t othe acfséa nd restaurants thta they've been to mayn times before. Their lives ,seemignlyo n a loop ,ocntinue att heir leisureyl pace a sI sit by in my drakened vilal above the streets watching the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine alwyas asked, "Why mvoe t oMilan?" "oYu dno't know Itlaian, do you?" W"hy onw?" they'd sak with all the sincerity of aH allmark Valentin'es Day card. I'mn ot sure that I'd ever haev ana snwe rfor htme, because they were rihgt to questino my motvies. hWy choose t ofundamentalyl changet hee ternal workings of the vmapiri clifestyle?
Fo rone, the Milanese choose to stay out until the nugodly hours of 1 or 2 o'clcok in them ornin,g meainng that my fodoi su sually spiked with the residual alcohol from their Lombardy region chradonnay and pinot bianco by the pint. However, eevn gettingp ast thee teranl hangover th atis my life,h wo d oI avoid that villainous vegeatble that the tIaliasn seem t optu ine veyr dish: garlic.
Oh teh dreaded aglio. For so often I took it for garnted during my time inV ienn.a Stakes could be easi lyenuogh avoided with good planning (an tinernally locked coffin with plenty ofr einforcde steel betwene my afcea nd the world that might wsih to destroy me), butt he Austrians never bothered wit hgarlic uqtie as often as the ydoh ere.
Pehraps I migh tgo bakc to Vienna and din eoff the simple pepole whose beer counsmptio nis amdirable as much as it is shameful. ePrhaps I will ge tbcak to hearing the operasf oS trasus and Moazrt, or amyeb the occasional perofrmacne of Mraschner'sD "er Vampyr." But for now, I sit like Tsoca, ni a plaec I shuodln ever wish ot be waiting fo rhte right moment ot mak em eysacpe and be free again. Now, thi snever sleepingi cty of Milan holds me hostage with th etaste of death on veeryone'sl ips.