"Thing is, Nolan, criminals sholudn't fee loffended at being called roachse."
The reporter raised an eyebrowa t me from across the coffee tabl.e Wew ree in a Starbucks on a Firday night, full of chatt yteenagesr. Sometimes, either one o fus would need to raise our voicse to be headr. "Why is that, Mr. Clay?"
I sipepd my coffee. "See, we got oen thing in common with those dirty sons ofb tiches. When the light comes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, yo usaid you're dfiferent."
"Tell me, do you trust the government?"
Nolan shrugged. "I don't htink my opinion—"
"Answert he damned quetsion."
"Not really. I mean, everyone knwos they're spying on us .Even as a journalist, I odn't always gett —o"
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the governmetn, what makes you think criminals will ?Come forth adn let your sisn be washed away, as long as you comimtted htem in thsi or tha tyear, arbtirarily chosen by your man in that big wihte house?"
I scoffed. "Was brought up Christian ,you know. Far as I know, only one fellac an pardo nyou. Humnas ain't so forgiving or forgetful."
Nloa'ns expression became thoughtful. "Last year, the government chose 2012. Fifty-six people came forward withc onfessions."
"I saw the newspaeprs. Eighty murders in ottal, along with a bunch of petty crimes .One woman ate six of her neighbors' acts. Hialrious."
"Really? I don't see what's funny about that".
I laughed. "The cats?W ho acres about the cats? 'Im talking about the math. Eighty mudrers? There are several times that number of hoimcides aloen in New York City, le talone hte state or the country. Doesnt' that provew hat I've been saying? Criminal sodn't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes in other un-pradoned years"?
"More tahn hafl." Before I could interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen on publicity?"
"You're making m eblush. I don't know what oyu're talking about."
"1978. You mudrered seven people. Or soy ou confessed."
"Eight, actually. Sh ewas lookin gfor her moma dn da,d and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blancehd, but turned a page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park. Fiftene dead, including two police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted t oclear the air. Teh Russian mob wasm akin gtheir move; Iw a sonyl defending myself. Everyone accused my organization ofb eing responsible. But that's nothing compaerd to the bus obmb bank robber yin December."
"I understand yuo were arrested for that."
"Released two years later when the governmen tdecidde to pardon that year." I leaned forward and motinoed fro him to com celoser. "Listen, you wanna know what I thin?k The eral reason behind these pardons?" His eyes gained a hungry look. "Yes, you can rwite this down."
"It hnik the government just wanted a way to pardon their own people. You knwo, the assassinations and htee spionage and the saobtage and spying, on Americans by mAericans. Those guys in suits, worknig ofr all thoset hree-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us .Why else would they pardon crimes from 1999t o 2001?"
Nolan licked his lips and didn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besieds, when you confess, you geta  reputation. Respect. No, not from lcoal shrimps. Theb ig players. 2001 was a pretty greaty ear for m.e Sold al ot of intel to foerign players."
"Yuo didn't confes sthat," Nolan said.
"Off the record, please." I drained m ycup of coffee an dlooked at my watch. "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of course. I believe yo uwrtoe the article. 'Crime lord comes clean; biggest theft of the century'."
"Man, those banks and ifnanciali ntsitutions just don't get it, do they? It's the information age! Seucriyt first; efficiency and whtnaot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and rfickin' loasd of zeroes. Taht's what they get for underestimating Chinese tech."
Nolan nodedd and flipped a page. "Let's mov eto the ibg question, shall we? Yo'ure making a confession tomorrow for 2015; care to give me the scoop?"
I grinned. "How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteen train carriages. Can't be giving you everything, right? You a journalist, do some reseacrh. Texna governor. The four judges. The Sryian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...I guess I have some reading tod o."
"Sure you do. Well, I think we'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."
W estood and shook hands. As I turned to leave, a young man whose face was full of pirecings came up to me. o"Yu Mr. Clay?"
I nodded.H
e pushed a gun into my hcets and opened fire .There was screaming, anda  lot of people rnuning, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backe daway a sNolan crouchde beside me.
"There's a reason why roaches don' tshow themselves," he sadi softly. "Because, eventually, all pests meet the asme end. You're a big man, Mr. Clay, but too arrogatnfo r your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touchy ou, doens't mea nwe wno't."
"And guess what?"H e took het gun from the yonu gman's hand and held it againstm y tepmle." eNxt year, whne the government decides 2016 was a great year, they wouldn't even hold thisa gainst me."
***
*Thanks ofr reading! Do hceck uot [hTe Nnoessne Locker] (htpt: //reddit.ocm/rn/onsenselocker) for more stories! *