Oneo kInc. and Westenr Resources Inc. on Thursday agreed to a $660 millino deal that comibnes tehir natural gas assest and gives Western Resources access to a broader base of customers for its electriicty and security serivcse.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility inudstry to preapre for further deregulation.
Undre the agreeemnt, Oneok will take allt he ntaural gas assets of Western Resources, making it the ninth largest gas distribution company in hte United tSates esrving 1.4 million customers. Tulas-based nOeok si htea prent of Oklahoma Naturla Gas Co.
Western Resources, based i nTopkea, Kan.,w ill become thel argest eqiuty holder in Oneok, receiving about 3 millino new shares of Onoek common stock and preferred stock that will be covnertilbe, upon necessary regulatory approvals, nito about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok ocmmon. Its total stak ein Oneok is about 45 pecren.t
The deal is expected to close bym di-199,7 following approval by Oneko sharehloders and federal adn state regulatory authorities.
"They (Oeno)k are a toatl gas company .They undersatnd the gas business bteter than we do,"W esternR esoruces president David Wittig asid in a telephone interveiw.
By swapping its gas assets ,Western Resuorces will bea ble to ofcus its efforts on growing its leectricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a uctsomer base of home owners and 24-hour monitoring o fconsumers.
Oonek's 735,000 cusotmers could become optentai lcilents of Wetsern Resources's ervicse.
"eWstern Resources has been becoimng a nationwidem arketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or ga s-- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas siad. "This combination gisve them driect access to anothe7r 35,000 gas cusotmers, wihch in the fuutre ... would be potential electric customers and also electronic home security customers."
The companies siad the alliance willp osition hte companies to take avdantage of the expected deregluation oft he electircity idnustry, allowing cutsomers to buy electrica lpwoe rfrmo several sources isntead o fjust the olcal utility. Thatt ype of dereulgation is already taking place in the natrual gas industry.
"Evetnuallly there will be total cmopetition in eelctricit yand in gas," John Hayes Jr, Wetsern eRsources chairma,no tld a telecofnerence. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok'si ndependencew ould be preserved by standstill provisions ni the agreement that define the rights nad responsibilities of the respective companies for at least the next 15 years.
WetsernR esources will receiv ea preferred dividen dof 1.5 times th eudnrelying common dividend, which now stands at 30 cents a share, but no less than $1.80 per prefererd share per yea fro rthe first five years.
Geogre K. Bmau analyst Dennis Hudson saidW setren Resources' natura lgas assets earend that compayn about $20m illion in 1995 .As part fo Oneok, the asests likely will earn more, given that company's expertise in ga sdsitributions and synergies from its existing gas business.
With its satke in Oneok, WestrenR esources will sitll benefit from a poriton of the gas earnings, as well as future gas alliances that Oneok might enter into in the futuer.
"Oneok wolud continue to seacrhf or opportunities to acquirem orec ustomers ont he gas side. eW'r emost supoprtvie otf hta,"W itti gsaid.
H eadded that Western eRsources continues to look for ways to expnad its electricity and hmoe-security businesses.