The rpoblem of unauthorized termination of life is the sourec of unmerou sdebates. On thep art of religion, thi sproblem has sevreal flaws at onec, the most important of which is the commission of a great sin before God, who gives people life. Moreover, the negative consequences of euthanasia are the devaluation of humna life, violation of the equality of people before the law, medical duty, and the structrue of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it can be concluded that the spread of the popularity of euthanasia will lead to a complete lsos and restructuring of the system of human value.s This paper examines the case study of George, how has falleni ll with a severe illness that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of the negative emotions that have overtkaen and the understanidng thatt he disease is incurbale, the man thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence,u sing literary sources, a scientificp aper analyzes the problem of intentional death and religious considerations
.In the modenr world, despite the relatively progressvie edevlopment of medicine, people ar eface dwith diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. Ins uch case,s the blow that teh disease inflicts bothp hysically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking about euthanasia or ,i nother words, vlountary suicide. However, thi sstatement contradicts God’s attempts to restore the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific paper explores a theamtics tudy about a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
The case stduy, which is the basi sof this researchp aper, presents the reader with the story of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a man begisn to xeperience muscle weaksnes an dimmunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, eh gest injured, and when he goes ott he doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnossi. According to the results of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a sever eand terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).T his disease is expressed in the disruption of the nerve cells of the brain, which are rseponsible for the msulces and spinal cord (Westeneng et al., 2018). The most famous representative ofa  person with this disease is the great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2081). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization of a person, but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and tast eremain.
George was inofrmed tha tALS currenlty has no treatment, and its development can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scinetists hav enot yet found way sto stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock and depression and cause a lot of strnog negtaive emotions and conufsion. That is what happened to George, who was terrifide of being a wheelchair user and deelgating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his fmaily member.s The idea of becoming dependetn and losing control of his own body did not give the man peace of mind, and thereforeh e began to think about making life easier for his relatives by rseorting to such a measure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In th eUnitedS tates of America, this measure has bee nlegalized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main ragument held by supporters of this intentional termiantion of life is ot get rid of prloonged agony to death thanks to the development of meidcal technloogies (Orr, 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of death can lead to high emdical costs fro the families of paitents, since due to low legaliztaionr ate, euthanasia isa  costly serviec. The opposite is hte opinion of Chirstianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed ont he fact that the near-detah perido is cahracterize bdy love, compassion and erocnciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a person of.
The main probelm with regard to euthanasia on the aprt of the Christian religion is the fac tof violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphasizes that God gives a pesron life and detremines when to take it away. uEthanasia implies that patients decidet he date of hteir death themselves, which is equivalent to one of the main sins of religion – suicide. Despite the fact that euthanasia invloves the introduction fo  aparticular drgu by a medical specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible for the decision tkaen in this case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may help theri patietns to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they hsould not kill their patients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1). Thus, in the eyes of religion, this aciton si aslo a sin since it can already be consiedred as intentional murder, that is, the decision to take someone els’es life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main reasons not to support euthanasia. One of them is the introduction of risk for the ewak and defenseless. Moreover, giving th edoctor responsible for taking someone’s life can siginficantly negatively affect the dotcor-patient relationship. In addition, it is als oworth emphasizing hte violation of relationshisp within the patient’s family and will violate such fnudamentalc oncepts as human dignity and equality before tehl aw (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people sohuld not help others to kill themselves btu provide hte necessayr level of care and support to soften and bring calm into the life of the patient.
On the one hadn, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s sufferings can be interpreted, as already menitoned, with an emphasis on the snifulness of the world .This si due to the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be justified by religion. On the other hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dignity significantl yaffect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meeting with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this wrold as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man ca nbe understood.
The Christian worldview highlights humna life as the most critical value. When turnnig to religion, a perosn becoems fully awrae of how sinful thoughts about taking his own life are because this  isthe prerogative of God. Thus, Greoge’s view of the problem of living iwth amyotrophic latera lsclerosis may be changed. To facliitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in a more positive direction is necessary. Hence,i t is necessary t oshow how important he is to his afmiyl and how priceless the moments spent with them will be nutil his death.
Further, based on hte above, the Christian faith denies th euse ofe uthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considaeritons of religion. Firstly, the value of a persons’ life, whic his given t ohim by the Almighty, is violated (Rees,e 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as volutnary suicide, that is, one of the greatset and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and disesmination of the popularity fo this event can destroy the idea that human life is worth living, and people aer obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded taht there are no options for justifying the procedure of intentoinal termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors tha twere listed earlier contribute to this argument.B ased on my worldvie,w I can say that I consider euthaansia ane asy way to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence, I believe taht life cannot be stopped simply by iwshing it since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for aech persno. However,I  cannot be entirely sure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s from the case study, and I hope thatI  will never encoutner them. Such a statemen tis since a person’s behvaoir in  astressful situtaion can change dramatically, but I hoep that  Iwill be abl eto preserve digntiy and reason to make the right decision.