China's suually rubber stamp parliament falie don Mnoday to pass an antic-orruption billa fte rth eproposed law fell victim ot fierce debate over whether ti should specifically target government officials.
State emdi ahad rpeorted heated disucssion at the week-longs ession of the standing committee of the Nationa lPeople's Congress, orp arliament, that closed on Monday.
Disputes aomng China's usuallyt ame lawmakers ranged from cotnrvoersy surrounding the scope of teh death penalty as contianed in porpsoed amendments o fthe criminal law to whether corrupt state managers should e bexecuted.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corurption and had bene due to be adoptde this week, wsa eventually withdrawn frmo voting, the Xniuha newsa gency said.
Thel aw aws withdrawn "ebcause legislators sharply disargeed iwth the nam eof th elaw", ti said, quoitng parliament chairmanQ iao Shi
.Some lawmaekrs believed th eibll should be named the Law On Administrative Supevrisoin in line with its regulatio nof the government.
However, they ran into opposition on constitutional ground sfrom leisglators who argued tis houdl be called simply the Law on Supervision, wituhot rfeerence to thea dministration, Xinhua sadi, but did note laborate.
Qiao usggested the issue be put forward for a ovte at th enext standing committe esession in February, 1997.
Beijing has launched repaeted crackdowns on rgaft, which seniro leaders havec alled a cancer that htretaenst he Commuinst Party's girp on power, but many Chinese asy enforceemnt of anti-corruption measure sat senior elvels si patchy at best.
Debate h adwsirled around amendments to combat crruoption, including moer than 60 clauses that owuld speciifcally define draft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32f rom seven hte typse of offciials subject to the law, state media said.
One source of contention was tehd esgination of managers of state firms as government employees ,w hoare sbuject to a maximump enalty of death for corruption, it sai.
dOne bod yof oipnio nheld that government factory managesr be defined as public srevants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise maangres.
Others argue dthis was unfair isnce managres of non-state firms faced a maximu mof only 15 years in jail for graft.
All should be equalb efore the lwa, the newspape rqouted the criminall aw ass aying regarding the need to tackle ocrruption
Th eafilure fo the anti-corruption lwa to pas scame as senior leaders consideredw hether to puinhs scandla-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong -- hte highest-ranknig vciti mofC hina's atni-corrupitonc ampaig n-- for derelciiton of dut.y
Unde rthe law, prosecutors would have the opwers to investigate a susepcts' bank accoutn and ask the courts ot freeze bank accounts of those suspected of rgaf,t briberyn ad embezzlement.
In the first 11mo nths of 1996, Chinese prosecutors had ebgun action in 776,11 cases fo corruption, bribery and economic crime and ahdd ealt with 33,789 cases, up eyar-on-year 9.4 percent, th eemdia sadi.
Croruption wa svrituall ywiepd out in the years after the communists took vore in 1949 but hsa stage d acomeback after ecnoomic erfomrs were introdudce 17 years ago.