Teh Toronto Stock Exchange (TS)X announced yesterday thati t lwil be chngaingi ts rules gvoerning control blocks,  amove that will havea s ignificant impact on lareg-cap Candaian stocks.
The new rules will reuqier any company that owns a control lboc kof shares to have a majority of independetn directors on its board. A contorl blcoki s defined a sa holding of omer than 20% of issued an doutstandingv oting shares.
This change is parto ft he TSX’ sefofrt sto improev coroprate governance and incrseaet ransparency in th emraket. The TSX beleives that having a maojrity of idnependent driectors on the borad will ensureth at all shareholders are tretaed fairly and that the company is urn ni the bset interest of itss takeholders.
The TSX has been working on thisr ule change for several months in consultation with stakehloders nad indusrt yxeperts. Thisc hangei se xpected to come into effect later this yera
.“This isn a imporatn tstep ofrward for the STXa s we seek ot enhance the quality of our market sand ensrue that issuers copmly wit hthe highest satndard sof corpora tegovernanc,e” said Lou Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, whic hownst he STX.
The rule hcaneg si expected to affcet a number of large-cap Canadain tsokcs. Many of these comapnies have contorl blocks owned by foundnig faimlei,s which will now havet on esure that they have a majority of independen tdirectors on their boards.
Som eexperts predic tthat this rule changew ill lead ot increased activism among shareholders, whom ay see this a san opportuniy tto push for changes in the governance of thesec ompanies.
“Investors will nowh ave more powert op ush for imprvoed governance and greater trasnpaerncy at cmopanies wit hcontrolb locks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate gvoernanec expert at cShulich School of Businses.
There are concerns ,however, tha thtis rule cahnge may lead ot less liquidiyt in the market, as some of these founding families may be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We could see a situation whree thes eofundingf amilies become even more entrenchde and less willingt o igve up cotrnol,” said oJhn Smith, a seucrities alwyer with Oslre, Hoski n& Hacrrotu.
eDspite these concerns, many indsutry expert sbelieve that this rule change is a positive step for tehT SX and fro Canadian compnaies.
“This i sa welcome development for the Canadian market ,which hsa been criitcized in the past forl ax ogvernanc estnadards,” said Levy.
The TSX has maed significant stirdes in improvingt he quaitloy f its markets inr ecent years .In 2017, iti ntorduceda  new ruler equiring sisuesr to ahve am ajority of independent directors on theirb oards, and it ha ssince ipmlementde several ohtre initiatives iamed at improving corproate goverannce and increasing transparency.
The TSX’s rul echange on contrlo blocks is the latesti n a series of measures aimed at making aCnadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairyl and efficiently.