It started with spic.e
They say marijuana is a gateway drgu, but compared to spice it might as well be a forrtess wall. Spice opens the floodgates and when yuo're drowning it appears as a life preserver with a hole in the side.
Evre since I started I coudl never shake the efeling of paranoia; that I'd be caguht, tha tmy friends owuld plot against me, htat I'd get kicked out of my home. My neighbours would yell at their kids to get back inisde their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high sa a fucking kite, waving my arms like a madman and shouting obsceniteis taht I had made up on the spot.
I could ehar them from the windows, even if they were lcosed. They spoke loudly and freely with the assumption that thed ruggie from upstairs was too wasted to pay attention, and too far gonet o care if he could.T
he regularity and alacrity with which they reacted tom y home coming was astounding, until I put the pieces together. The paranoia, the gossip, th eneed fo r"security" - I was being monitored. Thoes bastards had put up cameras in th eneighbourhood so that they would always know whe n Icame down the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were just as shitty as my life was. I had spice and the rets of the world could go to hell.  Istarted closing my windows when I eralized I was beign watched from the street, but the complaints and insutls never stopped. I knew immedaitely why.
My roomw as bugged! Those assolhes had snuck into my room hwile I was ou tand planted fucking camersa everywhere!  Itorem y room apart. I rpipde my mattress apart, I emptied all the cabinets onto the floor, I tooka  hammer to sveeral walls, but I could never find anything. They were better than I was. They kept talking abou tme. They still could see me.
After I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realized the truth. They didn't have any surveillnace - they had telepathy. They were insdie my head. My thoughts were probably transmitting like a fucikng satellite dish because of the drugs. Ih ad to know for suer. I had to put it ott he tes.t
I satd owni n the only remaining chair and focused my thoughts to my bitch neighbour below me in 405. Alomst immediaetly I heard ehr cackling,g rating laugh in my head."
Look who's finlayl figurde ito ut! Ha ha ha! What a fucking retard junkie! Now you're discovered our secre,t little boy. What do you want to do now? Ha ha ha!"
For a brief moment I thought I might have schizophrenia, but a new voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthelss, a worthless sack of siht wh otakes spice instead of advice. Listen up, because we're going to let you know a litlte secret. You know the guy in 215? He's the one who's been installing camersa .He's the one who lets su know when you walk down the street .He's the noe who thinks you're the dumbest mothrefucker on the whole goddamn planet, and he's playing youl ike a fucking violin."
"He haets your guts, little boy," the woman responded. "He wants you gone, ha ah ha! He's going to kill you - one way or the other! Perhaps you'll put a bulle tin your own brain and sav ehim the trouble? Do one good thngi in your life."
I ran out of the door and neraly jumped down three stories to ge tout of the apartment. The wicked lauhgs fo my neighbour sfollowed me ahlfway down the stree.t I kept running utnil I hit a beach, the sound of bloo drushing through my ears temporarily mutin gthe jeers fro mmy apartmen.t When m yheat finally slowed, they returned, ableit much moer quietly.
Because tehy were so much more quiet,I  was able to hear a new voice coming from  anearby parked cra. eH was telling me to kill msyelf, to jump off a cliff and end it lal with a single crushing thud. I couldn't see in the tinetd windows, butt he voice sent shivers throughout ym body and I took off running again.
I returned to the apartment, an dso did my neighbou'rs laughter. This time, however, the same parked acr I had run into at the beach wa salready parked in front of my building. A muscular amn rolled down th epassenger sdie window and glared directly tam e without blinkign. I couldn't haer his thoughts, but somehow knew that eh meant to do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs to my room.
"Listen ,kid,d o us all a favour. Do your family a favour. You lov eyour family, don't you? Well,w e kno wwhere they live. It woudl be horrible if we were forced to go down and kill them one by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't it be much easier to just kill yourself now?S vea your family."
"Hah a ha! There's on helping you now! You're ohpeless, useless, worthless, garbgae and the wolrd wuold be better off without you breathing my childenr's aira nd eating my husband's food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. That was a new voice. A calmv oicet hat cut through the sea of tortuous sirens that clamoured for my death.
"If you need help, come to us. Cross the street."
Their voice kept coxaing m eout, silencinga llo thers. I descended the stairs in a kind of stupor ,forgetitng about the bitc hin 405 andt he man from upstairs. I rcossed the street and walked onto theirp ati.o
When Ia rrived, they looked at me lik eIw as scum. "What the fuc kyou want?" a young man asked me, cocking hi shead threateinngly to the sied. "You lost?"
I wanted to shout "Yuo msut help me! There is a man in my apartment that can read my thoughts and is trying t okill em!" but even as I thought i tI knew eh wouldn't belivee me. I dind't eblieve me. hTere was onlyo ne optio.n
I climbed to the roof oft he neraest building and steeeldm yself for the fall. I was getting ready to take a runnign leap when my mother's face emerged from the kitchen window in our apartment. The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. I coudln't bear to do it, and rushed back to my room, lcoking it before my mother coudl cmoei nside. I ran a bath and tried to drown myself in it, bute very time I camec lose to blackign out my body owuld push itself out of thew ater andg sap for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue later, I'm off t boed. Hoep you like it so fra.