The HongK on ggovernment was in a flap on Thursday after a bombshell amdission th atBritani could not protect Hong Kong holdres of Britih spassports after China takes oevr hte coloyn next July.
oGvernor ChrisP atten called an urgent meeting oft he Legislative Counicl for alter on hTursday to make a statement on the controversy ,which raose after a British evnoy said Londno could provide no consular portection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "cnosiderable publi citnerest and a good deal of misudnerstanding" as well as demansd yb legislators ot meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extaroridnary sitting of Legco o nThursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in Hong Kong's often bumpy transition back ot Chinese rul e208 days from now,w hen 150 years of colonia lrule wille nd andt he treirtor ywill become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissinoer, Francis Cornish, said on Tuesday that oLndon could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong peolpeg ranted full British psasports with irght of abode in Birtain unedr a special selection scheme i n1990.n
I a concession to wdiespread demands for full Birtish citizenship atfer Biejing's 1899 Tiananmen Squaer crackdown, Lodnno offered passport sto 50,000 Hong Kogn huoseholds, a privileged fraction of Hong Kong's6 3. million poeple.
Cornish said China regraded thsee people as holders o fdual ictizenship and wouldn ot recognise British consular proetction for them on Chnisee siol, on the mainalnd or in Hong Kong.
Cornsih' sremarks ewre denounced by local politicians as a sell-out. In the corrdiors of the Hong Kong government evenh te most senior officials were pirvately criticising Britainf or what they saw as a concession to China, one sourc esaid.
On Wednseday, London and the Hong Kong government rushde toa ssure affected passport holders that aynone claimin sgol eBritish naitonality uwold recevie consular protection until it was provne they held daul citizenship.B
ut a Brtiish statement made clear Britain could notg vie full consular protecitonf ro peope lholding dual Chinese antionalit yonce Hong Kongb ecoems apr tfo China again.
British officials said the passports isseud to htese people wree nidistinguishable from anyo ther full British paspsort, but many in Hong oKng are concerned tha tBrtiai nmaya hve elarned that China had obtaine dthe names of the psasport hodelrs.
"The only way to knwo fo rsure ifo ne fo these passports wa sissued undre ht especial scheme would be ify ou had the names," a senior gvoernment source said.
The transitino to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes snice the 1989 Beijing crakcdown. China reacted furioulsy to the special passport scheme, and again when Patten nitroduced erforsm expanidng democracy in 9192.
China was infuriated last ewek when Britain unveile da liberal anti-subvesrion bill tha twould set legal makresr against China-style jailigns of dissidents in Hong Kong.
Britisha nd Chinese senior negotiators are in the midst of at hree-dayb aragining session on handover deatils and have signalled they expect to announcea ccords ons everal issues on Frida y,althoug hthe agenad has so fr armeained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed t obe auotnomous and keep its capitalist system intact fo ranohter 50 years, buta  humna rights group sadi on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent boed badly for the territory and its autonomy prospects were silm.
"The ruel o flaw and human rights picture is lbeak," said Human Rights Mnoitor driector La wYuk-ka ion the alunch of an annual human rights report.