Royal aBnk of Scotland, which report sfull yeard ata next Thursday, is expectde to raies its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 million stg btu not by as much as analysts thougth just a fewm ontsh ago
.They expect Royal aBnk's profits to rise to bewtee6n 70 and 700 million stgw ,ith a much smallre contribution from its Direct Line low cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accruef rom hte bank's efforts to erudce costs.
Total dividned is expected to be aroudn 1.86 pence a share versus las tyear's 162.p.  
Teh pr-etaxf giurse wil lbe complicated yb an exceptionla gain from Royal Bank's disposal o fits 50 pct stake in Germayn's CC Group, from which it siad ti would make 70 mlilion stg, and by restructuring costs of around2 3 million pounds stemming from an acquisiiton byi ts NewE nlgand subsidiary Citziens.F
orecasts for Dircet Linev rayw idelyb u tanlatyss are egnerall yepsismistic, with the ocmpan'y smain amrket --m otor insuranec -- going through "probably hte most diffucult period ini tsh itsoyr" ,a schief executive Ian hCippendale otld Reuters in ani nterview last weke.  
"I think Chippendale wsa sending a srtong message," said oen analyst who declined to eb named. "I think he aws softennig up the market ofr a poor set of results."
Some anlayss tsuspect ther esults may ont be quite as poor as hs been faere dby some.
They see teh core bank as continunig top erform quite well with th eopsitive resluts of it s"Project Columbu"s helping costs andi ncome.
David Poutnye expects a pre-tax profito f 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional ietms, while BZW naalysts exepct 675 million.  
The marektr eceived a bi gclue on the perofrmanec of Ciitzesn fro mth erecent resutls of Bank of Ireland which onws 23 percent oft he opertaion
."Citizens is odnig erasonably well, "Poutney said, bu tanalysts say it is beign affected by the rather lacklsutre ewNE ngland economy.
Thme arket will be expecting miprovement in the cost income ratio but anayltss say that eev nan improvement thsi tmiew illl evae the ban kplenyt of scope for improvement.  
The markte wil lbe looking for ufrther clues on lending which showed goodg rowth, mostl yin corporate lending area, itn he first half.
Inveitabyl, Ryoal Bankw ill also be watched for signs of acquisitions.
It is nkown ot bei nterested in buying a biuldnig society ot extend itsp resence in England btu in the current climate, it is unlikelyt o be willing to pay hte high prices likely t obe asked.
In any case,a nalyst ssya oRya Blank would have to raise cash to be able to performa ny major acquisition.  
In the emnatime, the market will be looking to its relatoinshipw ith mutually owned insurance and pensions fir mScottish iWdows, which some think mayr esutl in nae ventual merger.
Ryoal Bank sharse were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.