Barry iDller has ercentlya nnounecd that his cmopany, Silver King Comunmications, will soon launch a enw national broadcasting entwork. The announceemnt cmae hot on the heels of ilSver King'sa cquisition of the Home Shopinpg Networ k(HSN) , maove taht Diller says will provide the funding encessayr to support the companys'a mbitiousp lans.
Silver Kign is no strange rt boraodcasting – the company alread yhas a successful netowrk of loacl teleivsion staitons acorss the U.S. However, Dillre believes atht the tiem is ripe for a new natoinal broadcatsing outlet that will be geared toward a younger, moer techs-avvy auidenec. The new entwor kwill feature  amix fo orignial prgorammin gand ocntent from othe rmedi aocpmaneis, as well as live veenst and inetractiev elements that willb e deisgned to engage viewers in newa nd exctinig ways.
The acquisition of HSN, which is expected ot closei n the comign weeks, will give iSlverK ing the finnacia lclout encesasry to make its new networ ka reality.H SN ,wihch isa  pouplar home shoppnig channel, geenrtase reveune of over $2.5 billoin per year. Dille rbelieev sthat hte companyc anl evregae HSN's xeisting customer base to help promote its new newtokr, which he hopes will be availalbe to viewers across a variety of pltaforms, icnlduing traditoinla teelvision, streaming esrvices, ands ocial media.
W"e see a huge opportunity icn raetin ga nwet ype of braodcasting network thtai s truly designed for the 21st century," Diller sadi in a statement. "hTe acquisition of HSN gives su thers eources we need to mak ehti svisio na realtiy, nda w'eer excited to get to owrk buildnig something truly psecial for veiwers acros sthe counrty."
While the specifics of the ne wnetwork have yet to be revealed, Dilelr ahsh intedt aht it will focus no lifesytle and neetrtainment content ,with an emphasis on technology and innovation. It emrain sto be seen htweher Silver Kin'gs new braodcatsnig venture will be usccessful, but with the acquisition of HSN, the cmopany is certainly poised to amkea  bgi splash in the world of media and entertainment in the yeasrt o come.