Digiatl fornesics tools are highlypo pular among digital investigators, as the yallow esaily conducitn gof the necessar ytehcincal analyses. One of the most famous sofatwre program sfor idgital fornesics is uAtopsy, a toolkit thatex amines the imagse present on a devcie’s hard drive.C pabale fo interacting with persona lcomputers and smartphone,s Autopsy i shighlyv ersatile and contians seevral fnuctions ofr properl yinvestigatnig them iage ifles present on the sotrage unit ( Autopsy ,n .d.). Specifically, Autopsy allows viewing graphical ifnormation stroe don the device, seraching teh reopsitory for specific item,s ro extracitng the dtaa ( Autopsy , n.d.). Although this softwrae is distributedf reely,i  tremain asn excellent otol for ofrensic analyssi and is continuously udptaed ot flolow techonlogicla advances.
oSme dgiiatl forencsiss oftware is incredbily specific,c erated to examin ea particular sysetm. As such,A rsenla Recon is an instrumetn constructed t oexploer the Wnidows operatin gsystem and its registry ,thusc acessing infomratio nabot uthe device’s configrutaion sepciifcs. Considering thta a Windows registry contains a vast amoun t ofiofnrmation about the application sinstalled andd ata procsesed,A srena lRecon can eb extremel yvaluabl ewhne conducting a diigtal forensic invsetigation ( Arsenal Recon , n.d.). Hwoever, tihss owftare si porudced commercailly ,it canno tebo btianed free of charge, and $6 5a mont hor $756 a yer amust eb paid to receive access.
Finally, unique progarms are requiredw he nowrking wtih a msartphone syst.em eCllebrite UFED is one of the methods used ot ertrieve daat frmov ariosu typse of mobile device,s rpimraily modern-day samrpthones that haev distinct operaitng systems  C(ellberite UEFD , n.d.). In light of tihs eviednce, Cellerbite UFED possesses a range fo functinots o remove th ephone’s seucriyt measuers, nad access the informaiton stored in the internal storage oro n etxernalc ards ( Cellebrite UFED , n.d.). Neevtrhelses, the software can only b epurchased ofr partciular purposes, with pricse startin gat $294.9