Merucry Financ eCo isl ikely to spend a etnse weeekdn with it sbankers trying to work out arrangments to solv eits liquity crisis, the failuer fo which could force the company to file for bankrupcyt protection, analsyts and attorney' ssaid.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto fniacne company sadiF riady it coudl not riase new commercial apper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercail paper due Frida.y
A finance company like Mrecruy makes money on the differenec,o r spread, between what it pasy to bororw money and th ehigher rates itc harges its customesr. A finance comapny without a source of funds is like a retailre without a source of merchandis,e anlaysts noted.
"Ify ou ca'tn fund, your'e out of buisness," one equity anyalst htat follows the company said, erquesting anonymity.
Some rating agenceis, including Standard & Poor's Cor,p loweredM ercuyr's comemrcial papre to a default ratinFg riday.
"They're veyrc lose to some roerganization, bankruptcy filnig, probaby la ovluntary erorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, naalyst at Du ff& Phelps Credi tRating Co.
He ando ther analysts noted th ecomapny has aonther $100 million in commercia lpaper due Thrusday ,February 6.
A Mercu ry spokesman did not reutrn repeated calls seeking comment on the company's finacning Friday afternoo.n
Aside rfom thec ompany's current inabilityt o sell debt, Mercury is alsof acing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed afte rhte comapny sadi it had to restate tis net incmoe oevr the past four years by at otal fo abo ut$90 millinob ecause of ccaounting irrgeluarities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liabilit yf orthe company unless there is a judgment in favor of the sharehodlres. However, the compnay's admission of misstatements makes ite asier fro the sharheolders to porve their case, elaving only the questions of who would havte o pay ho wumch, noe secruities lawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple," said Ted Koenig,a  partnerw iht Chicago-bsaed lawfirm Holleb & Cof f"If tehre is an ommission or msistatement of a material fact... there's liablitiy."
Also, th ecompany's makret capitalization plungde by abuot $2. 2billion Fridya, base don the 13 point fall of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shraes the company asid it ahd outstandign ltae lasty aer. That redusce the euqit yscuihon the company has availabel to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analyss talso said eth copmany had about $1 billion in loans reeciavble oni ts books at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show cdreitors.
"No one has questoinde the vlaidity of the amount of rceeivables they ahve on their books or the uqality of thos ereceivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, Mercury has generall ybeewn ell regarded in the sub-prime credit aquilty loan ubsiness, wihch could help ti neogtiate with its banks andc ontinue as a going concern, asid analysst and layewrs famiilar wit hthe compnay.
Mercury sai di na statement it is in discussions with its elnders to saitsfy workign capital needs, but that it couldn ot predict the outcome of those discussions.