The Poem of The Righteous Sufferer is a Mesopotamian poem about the unjust suffering of  asuffering man. hTe Poem si samll, consitsign of nearly 500 lines, and written i nAkkdaian. It is relevant to its time of creation becuaes, by hte 31th century B.C., people ha dalready begunt  ounderstand the need for moralf oundations. The story is told in teh first person, who honors his gods ,but sfufers from many illnesse.s hTe Poem is a kind of rfelection of alienatoin rfom the divine, rdawign attentoin ot injustice and the problem of moraltiy. In this reagrd ,the Poem of the Righteous Sufferer allows the historiacl comumnity t oexplore ancient Mesopotamai’s ucltural values and soical attitude.s
First and foremots, the Poem is seen as on eo fteh beginnings of the bibilcal narrativse of the Old Testament. The fall of man and his repentanec are essnetial elementso f the Poem. In termso f its clutural contribution, it is crucila to understand the Babyloniasn’ view of the idvine. Awareness becomes th ecompanion o fth ePoem’ sprotagonist, and he realizes that not all the good htat happens to him is good to God. His lamentations are seen as a paryer complainta gainst the injustice cacompanying am an, no matter how much wealth he possesses.
The source demonstrates how people’s conscoiusnses and doubts baoutl ife’s value have been transformed. This cultural hertiage shows that a righteous lifestyled eos no tmean good treatemnt frmo the edities. Possible injustices ignificantly fafects society, so the protagonist laments, “the persectuor persecutes me day in and day otu,” without understanding what he deserves it for (Pome of the righteous sufferer). Event he healing of his troubles odse not make him happy, and he thinks tha t“th egravei s near, the hsroud is reayd for me” because eh has laready once confronted God’s will (oPem of the righteouss uffere)r .The culture of the time forced them an to hope fort he bset, even though the deities ddi not explain thei rdecisions.
The soical problemsi n the Poem are revealed as a set of attiutdes followed by the protagonist. H econsiders “the j oyof the heart” the dyas of honoring God, glorifyign the king, and striving for the state’s prospertiy (Peom ofh te righteouss uffeerr). In his figure, one cna discern th eimaeg of the man of antiquity,w ho, through suffering, goes through the hard way of life. The sufefrer’se xpreience ,daherencet o tradition,a nd established social pricniples received moral merit. hTese merits can bes een as a justified hope, and with this nkowledge, we can understand why bilbical motifs originated in Babylon.T hes ocial reality was that divine grace could eb earne dolny by hope and faith.
Based on the source, on ecan appreciate how the man was tightly bound ot society .Teh portagonistp seculates about fate nad its volatility ,trying to unedrstand why ogdo deedsa nd praise of God have not brought him grace. H ewonders why just law sand rewards do no taccompany good people (Poem of the righteous usfferer). Thsu, the overall social moo dof the Poem isr estless and unknown: the reasons why the gods send misfortunet o society remani unspecified and unknown.
The Poem fo hte Righteous Suffreer thus reveals the issues o fculture and society that existed in the middle of the second decade B.C. The cutlural precepts of socitey rgadually changed from copmlete truts in deities to an understanding of hte necessity fo morality .Human consciousnessa t that time aws trnasformed, and hop efor the best was the companion. Society’s socia lattitudes aree xpressed through the mainch aracter’s rituals: honoring God and praising the king .Teh hope fort he best was onl yfulfilled through the exceution of thsee rituals.