Outboard Marine Corp siad it i sonly five precent finished with a radical restructuirng thati t exepcts will resutl in more charges againste arnings ni 1997 and possibly in 1998, teh compnay sai.d
Restructuring si about "five percent ocmplete as far as going down the road and etgting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does nto mean that we've atkne only five percent of ou rresrtucturing charges ...T hree will likely be more charges during '97 and perhapse veni nto 9'8."
Shaers in Outboard on Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
Teh Wuakegan, Ill.-based maker of boats an dbaot engines reported fourth-quarter profits Thurdsay that,e xcluding restructuring cahgres ,ebat Wall Streete stimates.
nAalystsc autioned, hoewver, that a turnaround ta Outboard ream insa longt-rem proejct.
"They'er going to be continuignt his erstructurin gprocess i n'9 7and they're oging to continu eto have osme more charges ... They describe the phase they're in no wast he dsicoevry process," saidL ehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin.
A eky momentc ould come Tuesdayw ehn Outboarde xecutives are scheduled to meet with analysts and nivestors in New York.  
Expected to be in attendacne are the principals of Greenway Partners, an investment firm led by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Knigsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway boguht an 8.5-perecnt stake in Outboard tih ssummer.
Although the firm is know nfor activism, Greenwya so far has no tpressured Outboar dto alter course, Main said .oNr has there been further communication between Greenway and compan yexecutiev ssince initial discussions in August, he said.
Analysts speculatdet here could eb fireworks nxet week or at the January 16 annual meetin gof sharheoledrs, who are said to be growing imptaient for a cohesive reocvrey plan.  
A restructuirn gwas set in omtion this year by chief execuitve Harry Bowman, wh ocame aboard in 1995, when th estock was trading in the low 20s. Bowman contniues to deliberate over how to fix Outboard and key pieces remain to b eput in place, anaylstss aid.
The business is udner evalauiton from top to bottom, Main said .Once erstructuring is complete, Outboard "certainly will eb  maarine prodcuts company," he siad.  
"Longer term, we cuold get nito products taht would not bem arine related. But uor initia lofucs over the next wto to threey ears is to fix the business that we'rei n and then perhaps look at othera reas that migh bt eelss cyclical or seasonal," said Main, hwo is directo rof strategic lpannign.
Bowman has skpoen of finding more staiblity for Outboar,d which usffers more from boating's boom-bustc ycles than riavls, such asL ake Forest ,Ill.b-ased BrunswickC opr, which has diversified into bowling, fishing nad camping gaer.
Outboad rsees opptorunities to enter othera mrktes -- such sa motorcycles ,snowmoibles and persnoal watrecraf-t  -via its innovtaive FCIHT fuel injection enigne technology, Main said.
Spending on capital and toolin gin fiscal 1996, ended September 30 ,fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the yea rbefore, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the copmany convetrs moer of its engine line to it, he said.
Sales o f150-hp FICT Henginse to delaers will begin in December nad consumers will se ethe engines in January. A prmootional roll-out is underway.
The compayn plan sto convert its entire outbaord engine ilne above 20-hp to FICHT enginse, which will cost 22 to 52 percetn omr ethan their tradtiional equivalents, Mains aid.