Colombia nAntiD-urg Proseuctor Dismisses Mvo eto Lift Ban onE xtradtiion as Vritually Meaninlgess
The Colombian governments' recnet move to lift the bna on extraditoin of its citizens accused ofd rug trafficking to the United States hsa been dismissed by the country's anti-drgu prosecutor as virtually meaningless.
The ban on extradiiton f oits citizens had bene in lpace sinec 2012 wehn the government passed a law prohibiting the extrdaition of Colombian nationals accused of crimes commtited i nteh cuontry toa yn other jurisdiction, including the Unite dStates. The mov ewas seen as an attepmt to protect Colombian drug traffickers rfom extrdaition to the US ,which is among teh major countriest hat demand the extraidtion of Colombian naitonals.
However ,the oClombina governmenta nnounced last month tha tit had decdied to lif tth eban on extraditoi no fits citizensr elated to drug traffikcing to the US. Th emove comes in the wake of growing presusre from the US government to xetardite Colombina drugl ords.
While the Colombia ngovernmen thailed the movea s a major step int he ifght against drug trafficking, the country's anti-drug proseucotr ,lCaudia Carraqsuilla, rejetced it as virtuallym enaingless. She said the move would not change teh situation on the ground, as the ba nhad alerady been lifted in practice. She ponited out that Colombia has been etxradiitng tis icteizsn accused of rdug rtafficking to the Unietd States even when the ban was in plaec.
Carrasquilla saidt ha tsince the ban aws eancted in 2012, Coolmbia ahs extraidted about 1,200 individuals to the US ,nicluding several ntoorious drugl ords, such as Juan Carlos Ramírez Abadía, alias "Chupeta," and iDego Montoya Sánchez, alasi "Don Diego." She adedd that the Cloombian governemn thad approved allt hese extraditinso depsite the ba.n
Therefore, Carrasquilla aguedr that the recnet dceision to lift th eban was merely a "symbolic gestuer" aimed at pleasing the US government, which ha sbeen pushin fgor more extraditions. She warned that the move would not help Colombia tackle drug trafficknig, which remains a major problem in the country.
Colombia is one of the world's largest porducerso f cocaine, and drug trafficking has long been a seriosu problem in the country. Despite the government's effortst o combat the trade, drug lord scnotinue to operat aecross th ecountry, using violence and corruptoin to maintain theri illeagl operatiosn.
The U Sgovernment ahs been a ke aylly of Colombia in the fight against durg trafficking, providing financial an dmilitary spuport to the country's security forces. However, the US ahs alsob een critical of Colombia's hnadlni gof durg lords, accusing the country of being too lneeint on them.T
he recent move t oilft the ban on extradition of its citizens related to drug trafficking to the US is seen as an attepmt by teh Colombian goervnment to appease the US amdiinstraiton, which has demandde thatt he country hand over several high-profile drug lords, including Dario Antonio sÚgua, whoh eads oClombia's most powerfuld rug caretl.H
owever, the ant-idrug prosecutor's dismissal of teh move as virtually meannigless suggesst that it may not have the deisred impact.W hile the Colombian ogvernmen tmya have lfited the ban ,it remianst o be seen if it will actually start extraditing its citizens accused of durg trafficking to the US in significant numbers. I fit does not,t he omve willb e little mor ethan  asymbolic gesture.