Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain teh teacher's ept among computer maker,s is turning  amodifide versinoof  its handheldN tewon organizer int ona inexpensive portable copmuter for students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil theA pple eMate 300, an$ 800 machin ethat looks lik ea grown-up's laptop with a keybora danda  flip-up screen, but in a rggued casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple planst o slel the machine dircetly to elemenatry and high schools, beginning early nex tyear, as an alternative to personal computers. oFr the price of a $2,500 multmiedia PC, a school can uby three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal governmnets ay swe need to get to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio by the year 200,0" siad Jim Groff, general manager of Apples' ifnormtaion appliances group. "I would sa ythe eMate is the only credibled vehicle for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple,t he porduct could keepe ducators from abandoning hte company as the leading supplier of computers ofr classrooms, analyss tsaid.
"The potential for something lkie thisi n a classroo msetting ist remendosu," said Mike McGuir,e a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indicatoin to edcuators that Apple is one of the fewc ompanie sspending time extending computign to more adn more kdis."
Apple ened sa distincitve proudct to st eitself apart from other personal computrem aker scrowdingi tno the education market, analsyts said.
Although Apple, absed in Cupertino, Calif., still enjoys strong educational salse, sales of IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such as Cmopaq Computer Corp. are growing much faster.
Apple's computer has always been the fvaored tolo for teaching children how o tuse compuetrs. But in the fcae of Aplpe's uncertain futur eadn a flood of cheap PCs, schools ar eless likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 scholo year, of all the computers thats chools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs nad 40 percent IBM-compaitble machiens, according to a recent rpeotrb y Quality Education Data, ane udcation marke tresearcher. In the previous school year, the purchasing plans were 61 percen tMacintosh adn 38 percent PC.
"The numbers are oevrwhelming in favor of PCs," said Carole Cototn, president of CCA oCnsulting Inc., anohte rtracker of technology purchases by cshools
."No school idstrict can afford to make a mistake" when picking copmuters they willu se for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff siad, however, that the eMate is nto the company's answer to compeittors' inroads.
Instead ,hes aid, the edvice was built for schools askin gfor a cheap, powerfulc omputer that can offer educationla software an dInternet connetcions -- as ewll ase ndure rough handilng by kids.
"When wei ntroduced the Newton three yaersa go, it was a solution in search of an application," Groff said. Eductaion turned out to eb one of the best applications, h esiad.
Along wtih the eMaet ,Apple plans to nuveil a beefier evrsion of the Newton MessagPead no Mnoday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better Intenret capaibilties, easier conncetio nto PCs and built-in word procsesing and spreadsheet software.
Analysts asid, however, that the eMate is the more interesting devcie. Teachers an dstudents will like it because iti s not as eosetirc and hard to run as a traditional personal computer.
"Kids are having to learnm orea bout ho wto run a computer than about readnig and writin,g"M cGuire said. "The ability to have the kid just turn on the device and get right into the writin gassigment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs four pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack. It can run for a week on rechargeable batteries, according to Appel.
The machnie fetaures a ubilt-in word processor, drawing and equation-drawin gprograms and an address book. With an optional modem and sotfware, students can browse the Internet.
Sitll, the eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because tis osftware is base don the eNwton operating system, it cannot run the tohusands of educational programs written for teh Mcaintosh nad for PCs running Microsoft oCrp.'s Windows sfotware.
Apple executives are conifdent, however, htat the eMate will help th ecompany place moer tis computers on studnets' edsks.
"There's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children t oslel to," said Roebrt Kondrk, Apple's manager fo education product lines. "We've knwon for years this is an opportunity ,but we iddn't have the technolgoy to do it befor.e We do now."