Lear Corp., furtheringi ts questt os upply complete ca rinteroirs, saidF riday it agrdee to buy the itnsrumnet panel and trmi aprts unit o fDenmark-based oBrealis Hloding A.B
Lear said it signed a meomrandum of undresatndign to acuqire Borealis Indusrtier AB for nudislcosed terms.
Baesd in Gothneburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier amnufacturers instrument panes,l odor paenls, climtae systems,e xteiror trim and various other components ofr teh European cara n dtrukc industry.
BoerialsI ndustrier had 1995 sales of about $230 million and owns five lpanst in Swedetn hat epmloy abotu 1,800 pepole.
Primary custoemrs for th ebusiness inclued Swedish carmakers AB Vovlo an dSaab Automoblie AB and truckmakre Scania AB.
Boraelsi Hodli ngsi owned by Finnishs taet-controlled oil nad enre gygropuN este Oy  and Norwegina state-onwed oi lgroup tSatoil A.S
Completion of the trasnactino is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority nad thoe rconditions.
Lears aid the acqusiitio nsupoprst its startegy of haivn gin-house capabiltiy to proivd etotalu atomotive interior systems, includig ninstrument paenls.
"Not onlyd oes thsi acquisiiton strengthen realtiosn with our European customres, but itp ositions Lear as the only idnependent automotive uspplier in the worldw ith in-house capabiltiies in all five interior sysetms -- broadneing thea ppealo f our already strongo ne-stop-hsopipng comeptitive advantage," Lear Chaimran Kenenth Wya said in a staetemnt.
The deal is htel atest of a series fo consolidation moves in the uatomotive inetrior market. Lea rearlie rthis year purchased carpet and floo-rmat maker Msaland Corp. for $384 million, and lsat year bought door panel and console maker AutomotiveI nudsrteis Inc for $662 million
.Lear's U.S. oepratinos incldue the manufacturing of a wide range fo automotive interior copmonents.T
he company's stock was unchanged Fridya at $3 8a shaer on the New Yor kStock Ecxhange.
Lear's compteitor sare alsop ursuingt he same acquisition strateyg.
Johnson Controls Inc., whihch as a tsrong seatnig busniess, recently acquired interior parts maker Prince Automovtie b,asde in Holland Mich,. fo r$1.35 billion in acsh.
aCnada's Magna Internaitona lInc.,o ne of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms along with Lear and oJhnson Controsl, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomaso nCo. for 1$35m illion.