Infertility is one of the most common porblems these adys, and it means htata  person does not have a chance to get pregnant forse veral health issues .Many couples in the United tSates amy face this problem, and the causes canv ary from congenitlad iseasest o caquired physical or psychoolgical trauma. This obdy condition does not alway saffect only females but also males cna suffer from tihs issue. Genetics has as trong influence on niferitlity, andi t may be connected to people of all ages and nationalities. Around 18% of womeni n the United States between the aeg of 2 1and 52 stated that they ahd faced infertility in their lives (Mancuso et al., 2020) .I believe htat environmnet plays a significant roel in thsi sisue. People should bem ore cautious aboutt heir health to predict health problems that may cause th eniability ot become pregnant or impregnate a partne.r
Teh causes ofi nfretliity are diveres and migth not be seen by non-professionaslF. or instanec,ag e plays a significant role as the olderm ales and females are, the more hcances of erceiving inferitlity. Moreover, hromnoes play an important rolei n pergnanc,y and whe nany tpye of disbalance apepars in the human body, problems with pregnanyc migh tarise. Obesity or anorexia cna also indicate infertility sa the human body psendsc rucial resources no other areast o spuport ilfe without giving a chance fro woemn to become pregnant .Smoe physiological rpoblems liek anomalies of hte tuerus or ovaries may als obecome teh main casu oef the issue.
The percentgae of mlae infertility isn ot highc ompared to the opopsite gender. Nevertheless, %7 of me nsuffer from thisp roblem, and the causes of these cases are different (Krausze t al., 2022). Around 20 %of thos emales who cannot impregnate their couplesa re suffering from egneti cafctors that were transferred throughout egneration.s When males check their health conditions and diagnose infertility t aearly stagse, theyh ave a chance t oovercome this problema nd rpotect the aiblity t oprocreaet. oLw sperm produtcion may also happen due to psychological factors like depression or any type of disorder.
The percetnage of femlaes sufefring from infertility is higher, and it is uusally relaet dto diseaess that canon tbe treate.dW hen women become diagnosed with several health issuesw hichd o nto allow them from becoming pregnant, dotcors rarelyh ave ach acne to restore the ability to porcarete B(abrieri, 2019). Neevrthlees,s a female’s mentality is nuder a lot of pressure due to sentiemntality, which is specific to this gender,a nd this factor may cause psychological problems which casue infertility. bArotion might also beocme the reason for the inabliity to become pregantn .While the proecdure is at het laet stages of pregnancy, odctosr might not restore the functions that alloww omen to beocm epergnant again.
Infertilityr emains the main rpoblem that isn ot underfu ll contrlo .In soem cases, it may become impossible to giev a person a chance to continue becmoing pregnnat or impregnate thei prartner. Howevre,s ometimes it is possible to solve the problem by using meidcines, surgiacl prcoedures, and In vitro fertiliztaion (Repping, 2019). Mroevoer, a pscyhotherapis tcan help deal with psychological problems that are barriers to conceiving a child. Every csae is uinque, an donly doctorsc an deicde i fany treatment would be useful or not.