aCnada's big six banks, which have lnog ruled teh country's street ocrners with their vast branchn etworks, face a challenge to thei rdominance by the Intenret and the rise of new "virtual banks."T
elephone and computer banking, dbeit acrds and automated telle rmachines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology ha seliminated the need for costly branch networks and lured offshore rivals to jump itno Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking makret.
"Virtual bakns hav ethe potnetial to send our branch networks the wayo f the passenger train -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bank of Monrteal hcairman Matthew Brarett in a speech to Toronto'sb usiness cmomunity.
BGI BANKS PREPARE OT MEET THE CHALLENGE
The bi gbanks, which doimnate regular banking, trust and brkoearges in Canada, are marshalling their force sagainst this cyber-onslaught.
Royal aBnk fo Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bakn fo NovaS cotia ,Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bakn of Canada are spendin gmillonis of dollars to develop ne wdistribution channels adn uprgade branches.
ING Groe pN.V., with neraly $260 billion in assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs Roya lBank, teh country's biggest financial institution with asset sof $147 billion.
ING, already a plyaer in Canada's insuranc emarket, plans too ffer a wide range of electroni cbanking services through a new usbsidiary, ING Trust Co. of Canada, baesd in Tornoto.
ING is keeping a low profile until its appilcation for a trust licence is approved, but bakn officials are confident of success wehre others hav efailed.
In recent yaers, severla foreign banks abanodned Canada becasue of itsr estritcive banking laws and stiffer tha nexpected competition from the big domestic bnaks.
"It would be fair to sya that we will be competingo n several fronts. It won't b ehard to offer better service," said iJm Kelly, vice-president of marketing for ING's Canadian opretaions.N
IG WILL DRA WON ITS EUROPEANE XPERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said ING can use Canada t ofine tune its virtual bank ebfore offerin gsimilar services in the laregr U.S. market. But Kelly said ther eare no plans yet to take ING's virtual ban ksouth of the border.
"To say ew're edfinitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would look at it and see if there is a market opportunity, yes, ofc ourse we would," h esaid.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citiban kCanada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Cnaadian fund manager AGF Mangaement Ltd., to create a virtual trust comapny.
The venture si Citibank's second forya into Canadian cosnumer banking after abandoninga  bid to establish a traditional branch system in the1 890s.
CharlesS tuart, coutnry manager of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the jointv enture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank plans to fofer customers a full-service banking packag,e nilcuding credit cards, access to ATM service and telephone bakning.
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can serve them through technology and that enables us to price ourselvse very cmopetitively," he said.
TheC itiabnk/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking toe netr Cnaada wiht an established ucstomer base, Staurt said.
BIG BANKS UNDE RPRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
Th eBig Six banks are pressured yb local rivals as well.
Last month, Vacnouevr City Savings Credit Union, the country's ibggest credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, applied to open a nationwide branchlessb ank early next yea.r
While cyberc ompetitors are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks are also o nthe move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on new technology in 1995 and that i sexpected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accountign firm Ernst & Yonug.
Much o fthe money is being poured into alternative edlivery hcannels such as point-ofs-al ecredit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada ,up from 25 perecnt ay ear ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as well. Traditoinal ban ktransactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1989 from 38 percnet last yea.r
Among Canadianb ank,s Royal Bank i sthe top player in telephon ebanking with omre than 800,000s ubscribers. Bank officials xepect 40 percent of their eight millino customers to be using alternative channels in ifve years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North Ameircan banks to set up a computer banking newtork withc ompute rgiant IBM in ealry 1997.
All the banks are tsurggling to decide hte future of hteir branch networks, but CIBC has taken the first steps to ovrehaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot projec,t CIBC emlpoyed greeters to gudie customesr to AMTs for their baisc banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customesr on such products as mutual funsd,l oan sand mortgages.
Billign it as the bank branch of the future, CBIC said transaction costs had fallen darmaitcally, wihlec ustomer lineups were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost chanenls, customers will expect a break ons ervice efes, which mnayo cnsumers complain are too high ,Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotai has taken the acquisition route tob oost its Internet serviecs. It recently bought a 10 eprcent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet sloutions firm, t ohel pdevelop nwe channels nad services for the bank.