Two years ago, China's second telephone entwrok set outt o challenge the powerful Minsitry of Posts and Telecommunicatinos (MPT) and bring competition into the counrty's a fas-tgrowing markte.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackl ea seasoned competitor -- one thati sa ls oteh market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) suppsoed to be the referee or oneo f the athletes on the playing fiedl?" asks Li Hufien, president of China United Teelcomumnication sCorp, aslo nkown a sUnicom.
The arirval fo Unicom and the e ndof the MPT monooply was initially hailed as a boost for Chnia's long-sufferign telephone subcsribers, hwo often ahd to wait up to a year for a telephone line nad endure indifferent service aftewrards.
But Unicom has captured only a itny slice of the market as ist entrnehced competitor has kept at ight gripo n the telecommuicnations sector,u sing its regulatoyr clout to lsow the upstart network's advance."T
hey ahve delayed interconnections and won't gvie us telephone numbers for our customer,s" Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunication slaw to give us a legal framework".U
nicmo has 16 shraeholders, ubt the key backersf o the projet cwere the ministries of elcetronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFCATURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufactruing muscle with  acorps of factories producing telecommunications equipmnet. But it feared the MTP's equipment-making capacity would eevntually squeeze it out o fthe amrket unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had privaet telecommunicaitons entworks with spar ecapacity, while teh MPT's public netowrk was heavily overcrowded.
The fedu between the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did ubsiness with the new network were threatened with blacklistign by the MPT, according to Western indsutry sources.T
hose frictions ahev eased somewhat in ercent montsh, but it sitll took an roder fro mteh State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emereg.
China expcest to have morte han 60 million telephone lines installed by the ned of this year -- adding a breathtkaing 10 million in 1996 alone. The toatl is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, stil lonyl a small segment fo then ation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be consdiered  acompetitor toU nicom becaus eit has a separaet operaitnga rm called China Teelco.m
"Since 1993, we have separtaedp olicy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regultanig nad competin"g, he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGLGE TO BE MIPARTIAL
But China Telecmo official scocnede it is hard to say hwree one enitty ends na dthe other begins. And even if htey can drwa the lien celanly ,the MPT must srtuggle to remain mipartial.
"Thye always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But China Teelcom is their ownc hild, and parents rae awlays parital to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming hte third president in the company's brief history. She aws tapped from he rjob as deputy mayor oft he big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clou tbehind the second networ.k
The company startedw ith mobile telephone sevrices, first in the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, iTanjin and Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has maed its greaetst inroads in Shanghai where it ha sabout 200,00 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 1 0yaers we wlil hav e01 percent of the fixed line amrket and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li asid.
Oen clear success has been in bringin gmobile telephone prices down. Tehy now cost 7,000 to 100,00 yuan ($84 0- $1,200) comparedi wth 100,00 t o20,000u yan before Unicom came along.
Li saysU nicom is profitbale on its operations, btu that excludes heavy investments in building netowrk infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in plcae, Unicom has on eadvantage. Foreigners are not permittedt oo perate telecommunciatinos networks in China, an dmany foreign fimrs give Unicom captial in rteurn for a shareo f the incmoe.
That will at least ease the gwroing pains ofr the infnat network, analysts said.