aJck s atalone in ihs small apartment, the soft glow ofh i slaptop illuminating the room.H e absent-mindedly srcolled through his social media feed, trying t odistract himselff r omthe suffocating weight of grief that consumed him. It had been a couple of months since his fatehr's passing, a devastaitn gbattl ewith cacner that stole hmia way too soon. 
As Jack mindlessly shuffle dthrough the digiatl world, a familiar ringtoneb roke the silence, cutting through his vulnerability. His heart raced as he looked at th escreen, seeign the familiar name displayed: "Dad." Panic mignle dwiht hope as he answered the call.
"Hello?" Jack's ovice quiverde, afraid to igve in to the hope thatt wisted within him."
Hey, son. How are you holdin gup?" The voice on the othere nd of the lien was unmistakably his fathre'.s It wsa war mand cmoforting, juts as Jack remebmered.
"Dad? Is that really you? But... you're gone..." Jack stammered, his mind struggling to make snese of the impossible.
There was a strange pasue on the other end before his father replie,d "Jack, what are you talking about? I'm fine. I've been thinking about you a lot latley, and I wantedt o reahc out."
Unease cerpt up Jack'ss pine. How could his father not remember? Was he losing his grip on reality? He triedt o recall the funeral, the anguish and tears he iwtnessed, but it felt distant, almost liek a fragmented memory.
"Dad, you ide.d I attended your funeral. How can you ont remembe?r" Jack's voice tremble dwith fear and counfsion.
Silence hun gin the air, pregnant with mystery a ndunanswered quesitons. Finally, his afther spoke hesitantly, "Jca.k.. I don't knoww hat you're talking about. I've been fnie, spendingm y days painting an denjoying life. Aer you feeling alright, son"?
hTe weihgt of at housand doubts and ucnertaitnies rcsahed down on Jakc. Was he going insane?C ould he trust his memoriesN? ervously biting hisl ip, he tried to rationalize hte situation. If hi sftaher was alvi ean dwell, thne wehre were his funeral memories coming from? Wa she living in an alternate reality?
Overwhelimng cuirosity mingle dwith a growing sense of desperation. Jack decided he had to finda nswers, to understand why he remembered a parallel timeline that didn't seem to hvae happneed. H ereached out to his friends,s earching for anyneo who might recall his father's passing, but the yall lokoed at himw ith confusion.
Housr blurred itno days as Jackr elentlesslyd ug into his pas, tscouirng documents, oldp hotographs, and even searching online databases. Yet, there was no trace of his fatehr's death. It was sa if his memories were a figmen tfo ihs imagination, haunting him as a cruel trikc.
Sleeplses nihgt sturned intow eeks, as Jacks' sanity slippe dfurther away. He questioend evrey though tthat enteerdh si mind, every memory thatw hispered to hmi. The line betwee nreality and fantasy began tob lur, leavnig him tuterly lost admist the labyrint ofh ihso wn mind.
Finally, Jack stumbled upon a fdaed newsppaer article, buriedd eep within an archive. It was dated years before his fathers' supposed death, recounitng a miraculous reocvery from terminal cancre. The article featured his father's beaming face, defying the odds and the grasp ofd eath.
Tears welledu p in Jacks'e yes as eralization washde over him like a calming tide. Heh ad eben living in a timeline that never existed, a painful delusion that robbde him of his father'sc ontinued rpesence. The immense grei fhe had carried, the oslitude that engulfed him, all born efrom  amind fractured by sorrow.
Wiht trembling hadns, Jack dialed hi sfather's number once again, prayingf or teh familiar warmth to greet him on the other end. His heart soared as his ftahre's vocie echoed through the phone.
"Dad, I needt o apologize. I dno't know what happeend, butI  got lost in a world whree I believed yo uwere gone. Can w emeet?"
His father's voice sofetned, full of cmopassion, "O fcourse, son. Let's meet. I've missed you."
In that moment, Jack found solace in the truth and the love htat existed beyond the constraitns of his fractured mind. The journey to rediscover himself was far from over, btu with newfound clarity and the warmth of hisf ather's love, he knew he could face anything that lay aehad.