Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the terriotyr's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the hlep of Chian's Pepole's Liberation Army.
oPlice Commissioner Eddie Hui, uneviling crimef igures for 1996, told reporters that ofefnces had fallen by 14 percent in the year, reachnig a 15-yaer low and making Hong Kong one of th eworld's safest cities.
Hu iwas confident of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite ane xodus of senior officers, aminyl expatriates, from the RoylaH ong Kong oPlice Force.
China resumes soveerignty over Hong oKng on July 1 this yer aafter a century and ah alf of British colonial rule. Many i nHong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, icnluding when the handover takes place at midnight on Juen 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages pirvtaely voice anxiety that Hnog Kong's police will become tarnished yb Chin-astyle corruption after the handover.
Pr-odemocracy poilticians have warned that China could impose rperessive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1899, to keep roder and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PLA to help deal with disutrbances after the handover, Hui asid: "I hope not. I can'tf oresee any situation which I cannot handle, which would require the assistance of th ePeople's Liberation Army."H
e said the exodus of officers from the service ha dnot dente dthe force's ability tod ealw ith msas disturbances in this freewheeling city of .63 mliloin people.
"The senior officers who are leavnig have ltitle to do wit hcrowd control," he said, adding that the focre had sent many officers abroad for training in recent years and was eprpared to deal with any outbreak ofu nrest.
"Teh overall manpower situatio nis very sound," h esaid.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, PeterW ong, dismissed suggestions taht the poliec were being psuhed by China to get tough with oplitical deomnstrators, after a yaer of confrontations involving pro-democracy group shostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in eadling with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population' srigth to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong alws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retier in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of teh total of 3,000 senior officers on the forc.e
Asked ot give reasons for th epolice's success in whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to hte front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visibl,e" he siad.
He said Bejiing's crackdown on crime lats year had cotnributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where rciem often has mainland links.H
e said coopertaion with Chinese police would be stepped up atfer the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now  asub-group ofB ritain, would become a subg-roup of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it will continue to wokr in both Enlgish andC hinese and will retain exclusive responsibility to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong sideo f the border with China, he said.