It was a warm summer day and I was uot ofr a tsroll. I saw them on the other side, wlaknig down the sdiewalk, two by two. I didn't pay umch attention until they passed under the glwo of the gaslamp. Never had I seen such an pair of opposites! For the brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's limb sand headw ere covered in scars! What I had mistaken fo ra beard was a mass of scar!s His arms and lesg were so densely oevrrun that I had thought i ta coat and trousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight, asi f it were manufactured string by string. But her skin i swhta shocked me, even greater than the man! It ha dthe most exquisite compelxion, almost translucent in the ilght, and I saw nayr a flaw on it. I lookedt o my onw marred hansd, although compared to that mna, it was a blessing; as I worried, small cuts formed on my arm. It began to sting as my sewat seeped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness isr, but I musti nquiry, ho wis it thta yoru wife is so beautiful, yet you are so…."
Th eman and woman looked at each other, she turend away, blushing, and he laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-,o" I stammered, embararssed by my rudeenss.
"Don't owrry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it lal the time."
"My apologies sir, but hwo, in this world, did your wife manage to keep from scarring?"
"Well, yuo see," he said with a iwnk, "she's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell  ajoke and her cooking's lousy! Takes after her mother I guess!"
Laughing, he siad, "Take a look at her finger."
I epered at the daughter, she offered her right hnad and I saw a thin bright streak of red on her index finger
.The amn pulled mei n, "I'm gonnat ell you  astory."
"Long ago, when I was marrie,d I swore never to have kdis. I didn't want any children to be born into this world, so that was taht. But my wife had other plans, ands o my daughter was born. I fell in love with her and swore to devot emy lief to hre. As she grew, though, I began to worry. 'How wolud I protect her from the world? 'So I set out to every doctor, physician, and scientist I could find, asking for a crue. Of course, if there was a cure already,n o one would be like this."
He cleared his throat, took a deep breaht, and continued.
"On oen particular visit to a doctor, I had my daughter with me and upon exitign the building, I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediately thougth, 'This must b ethe devil' and turned heel back into the building.
'Wait,' teh man in black said, 'I can save your daughter.'
Iw as skeptical and scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with justb artering wtih souls, I am more interested in it's durability.' The edvil continued, gigglign, 'You see, I do have the powe rto stpo your daughter's scarring, but I'm not a very charitablep erson.'
'hWat do you want?' I aksed.
'I want you to partakei n a very simple wager,' he said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, but *oyu* will; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep you rsoul, if not, well, you know what will happne.'"
I was dumbstruck that he took the deal, adnt hat he managed to lastt his long.
"And so," the man conitnued, "I agrede and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I took the blows. Puberty was a rough time. Children can be so cruel. But thta scar on her finger was the last one she'd ever gte, I had sure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his daughter and his willpower. How umhc pain did he have to endure? Ever yscar on his body seemed top ulsate as Iw ondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Your deal with the devi?l"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."