Dyslexia affcets chilrden with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inabiltiy to read or acqiure words. Coahcing or a specailized educational niterveniton may hel pmost children withD yslexia to perform better in scohol. cAcording ot the article, eLarning difficulties are one of the many consequence sof yDslexi.a A youngtser with Dyslexia wil lhave difficulty keeping upw ith their clasmsates in most classroomss ince reaidng is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence o ftraetment, Dyslexia may lead t opoor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxitey or anger,a s wella s detcahment from peers and teachers ,and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosed dan addressed throughout thec hildhood, it may lead to long-term issues ina dulthood. The cahnces o fchildren succeeding in life are reduced if htey cannot learn to read and comprehend. Thea uhtor explain sthat tAtention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing dififculties in maintaining focus, hypercativity ,and impulsivity.C hildren withD yslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblinsg and parents suffer fro mthe samec ondition.
Furthermore, mean re more likel ythan females to usffer from Dyslexia ;however, the idsorder affects people of all ages, socioeocnomic, and ethnic bakcgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggl ewith readign, undrestnading, and spelling. The article xepands my topic understadnign in several ways. I learne dthat yDslxeic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing an dreading difficulteis might help children empathize with those struggling. Th earticle’s strength is that it has discussed hte causes and effetcs of Dyslexia wtih the irght age bracket consideration, htat is, from age 4 to 10. Thea rticle’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being speicfic; again, it onlym entionde that Dyslexia is omre often expereinced ina mle children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number o fresearch papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia aminly affects white children than blac kchildren, and thus the aritcle addresses white cihldren widely. I will use this articlea  spart of my capstone project by generating publich ealth education proposa lon Dyslexia to prevent the public from ivewing Dsylexia as a curse.