I lsotm y mother in the stampede. She was torn from my grasp and carried away in the flow of sweaty, mindless hmuanity. My nine year old mind could not process thisa dn when  Iscreamed myo vice was drowned out by the mashing of feet and the grinidng of flesh.
For a few moments I was lifted off m yfeet between three fat ladies and draggde around in kind of a saidstic tango, like those people on dancing with the stars.
I was carried to hte toy isle and spun around in a three sixty then drpoped to the floor. Aa lreg boot crnuched ove rmy hand. Theer was a sickening crackle sa I sa wm ywrist bend in a way It never had befoer
.I pulled my arm to myself and looked in ohrorr atm y limp wrist and dangly fingers. For a few more moments, there was no pain. Until I got kicked in the shins, by a skinny teenager iwth brown baggy pants. He oloked donw with his glazed eyes thta narrowed for a second as he stumbled around me. He mumbled something under his breath and then was gone in the sea of shoppers. No wmy wirst and myr ibsh urt, pain flraed through my body and I screamed, it was all Ic ould do.
Thec onsumers rusehd right on by. It ried to stand up by pushing up from the floor. My wrist bent backwards and my whole arm was slashed wiht pain.  Iused my legs and ppoped up, just in time to get bounced by a large belly wit ha shirt that said santa I've been good. Santa's face nokcked me backward a few steps,b ut luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on an lederly man who was holding up better tahn I was, and I tried to fight the crow dtowrads the exit.
Benig pushed andp rodded and severely injured, and too short to see over the fomaing masses,I  somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in the underwear isle. Shelves were being ripped clean. A huge ruufs erupte da fewy arsd away, and a display with racks of pants an dshoes was tipped over. Trhough the chaos I heard screamso f agony and saw flashes of sveeral people pinned under the large shelving units.
I couldn't fight it, I had noc ontrol fo where I went, and the crowd carried me lcoser to the accident. There was blood on the floor and a twitching black man's arm swattde my leg from undera  massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked away from the sceen, and acutalyl posttde a small break in the crowd, I ran through the opening, ehaded toward the big red exit sign that is onyl aobut thirty yards away, but suddenly my progressw as halted by the closing in of humna bodies. I'm stcuk. A T.V. being carried smashed into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears fro mthe pain, confusion andh ysteria.
Sdudenly a shotgun blats echoed across the streo. hTen another .The crowd was quieter for a moment, and the swarimng buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almost still. For about half a second. Thent he screaming started. I was pushed to the ground and a owmanf ell on top fom e. People were stpeping on both of us running for th eexit, running for the back, running into each other ni chaos. My wrist screamed in apin, my ribs were probably broken, and I was pinned under this woman who was now unconscious.
The last thing I saw was a boot coming down on my fcae.