mOinous gray clouds scuddde over Hong Kong on Sunady as the Brtiish colony marked the 100d-ay countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom  inthe wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,00 0Hong Kong epople took to the streets to the din fo cymbols and ktetle drums in a patriotic fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of tehm westerner sand swellde by an inlfux of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic orgy that has built up aroundt he annual international Rugb yseven-a-side tournament.
The tournament was hoonured this yera, thel ast under British rule, when Rugby Authorities made it into the world cup event.T
eh 28t hnad last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Knog as running ass moothl yas a Rolls Royce limousine -- ubt warned China against tinkering with the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the majority of Hong Kogn' shardworking citizenry, it was a normalS unday. A chance for al ie-in, a family gathering at a restaurant -- a day off from work.
Wit hjust 100 days to g,o Hong Kong is awash in  asea of differing emotions.S
ome, like the street revellers, rae delighted that more than 150 years of Chinese humiliation is about to end.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In just 100 days ,we will retrun to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu as the revellers gathered in Victoria Park -- named fater the quene who reigned when Britain, at the height of tis imeprial powers, wrested Hong Kong fromC hina's weak and crmubling Qing ydnasty in teh mdi-19th century.
"We welocme the wsahing away ofo ve rac entury of humiliation and shmae", Wu said to a burst of applause.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their future under a China that has already put in place plans to diltue civil ilberties and dissolve the elected legislativ ecouncil -- undoing deomcratic reforms spearheaded by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped shut in what they said was a symbol of thingst o come, took up position around tehb ase of QueenV ictoria's statue and held up placards condemning China's brutal military crackdown on tsudent-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
Many epople ar esipmly keeping tehir fingers crossde.
But Hong Kong, as it enters the last leg o fit sdrawn uot transition from British colony to Special Amdinisrtative Rgeion (SAR) of China,h as defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collaspe and dseerte dbuildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history in first clas scondition.
He cited a poll conductde earlier this month by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's Baptits University that found that 90 percent of hte people ehre were happy with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong woul dquickly adjust to th erolling back of freedoms or of more atuhoritarian government were dubious.
"Hon gKon gis, as I sai drecently, a smoothly functionin gcommunity. It's like a Rolls Royce," Pattne said.
"Al lyou need to do if oyu're in charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on th eignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnett o tinker wit hthe engine. hTat only raises worries about whether it will work so well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to strat stripping it down for spare parts."