"Who can replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Daeth there can be no reckoning upon the sinflu mortals."
War scrtached his thinning beadr. He wasr unnin gout of opitons. No others had daerd t otake pu such a heavy burden. While War aws n ostranger to the ohrrors of, he shuddreed t otihnk about the tarocities that Death had committed. Was therea ny being in the7  relams to taek up the Cloak and Scythe?B
"ut there is someon.e "hsised Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all th eatrocities we have cmoimtted were dealt by Man. War, death, famine and conqeust. These were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don the burden of Death then a man himself?"
Famnie's ragged hood covered his face, onl yshownig his edcaying mouth twisted in a sick smile.C
onquest wa squick to challenge.
"Man, donning the very bnae of his existence? rBother, your imprudence will be the edn fo us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. He is greedy, seflish and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result i nabuse."
"Conquest ,you rae as foolish as ever. Have yo uleanrt nothign frmo Death? He was the iwses tof us all, he-
""If Death was so wsie, explain his abrupt departure. Why did he leave his udties behind? We are hte horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of th eHeavens sounds we will charge and strkie fear itnto h ehearts of sinners. It is who we aer. Death wasa  fool for leavin.g"
"NEOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimtsone. Heu nleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyon drecognitino. Breatlhess, War stood up towering over hi sofe and boomed.
"I iwll not take this insolence. Daeth aw sthe best of us. I loved him as a brother and am enotr."
War's stone faces oftened for a second.
"Should you be stupdi enough to blasphmeeo ru brothera gain, I will end oyu".
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to theb itter taste of defeat. He silently vowe dthat War would pay for the huimliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a mortal can replac eDeath. Bring him to me.""A
s you wish brother."