I knew I couldn ot cook, but I did not sewat it. The doo rbell rang, an dI was so excited. I opened the door and let m ytwo gooey one eyed copmanions in. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. I swung. They were mine now. All imneT
he two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellyebans.T ehy stuffed themselves, those crude idiotci blobs. Smiling thye commented on how starnge human customs were. hTat was quite funny, considering what  Ireally had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to tehir places and woke up, ate ,then lsept. Jellybeasn were their every waknig hour.T hey livedj ellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly baens.
On their ninth week they realized what I wa sdoing, butt hey were powerless. I laugheda t them sa I broke their jaw hinge.s Now they can't complai,n so all wsa wondrous again.
B ythe next week they went on a jellybean strike, but I knew that would not last long, considering how attached to the food they were.
I broke their jaws, their lif,e their wlil. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, my little companiosn wree so enteritaning. But the little trick wa sstarting to get old. I grew tired, so I decided to spice htings up once again. I starved them. Then, I tlod them the only way to get their food was to beat one another up. Thew inner would eat. However, that ilttle contset would eb way too boring, so I the nsaewd off each of their four legs. I thenl et them at each other. Thye sprang like animals, btiing punhcing each other. It was a lsow process, them having no legs and little energy. But that made it all the moer worth while. I was even kidn of sad when finally the weaker of the two was knocked out. I knew In eeded more. So then, I spiced things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that in oredr to get his meal he wouldh ave to kill his best alien friend. He was shocked .I laughed again.
So, I prepared them urder for him slowly. I handed the syringe filled iwth black lcoirice to the victorious alien. The loser alie nthne woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his body. He died hsortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien tha twas still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw was broken after all. He demanded his jelly beans .Itw as not polite neough. His attitude was smiply unacceptabl.e So  Ikicked hmi in the gut. I threw him againstt he wall and told him to be polite. HE WAS THEN KNOCKED OUT. HE COULD NO TPERFROM THE TASK OF ASKING NICLEY. H EHAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTAL MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy did I lov etaht experience. But I would no tmiss it. It was a lot of work. Jellybeasn are costly after all. I ate my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even though I oculd not cookw ell, I knew not to sweat itf rom the beginning. My plan hadb een a great success after all.
DidI  write it correclty BookWyrm17? What do you think baout it? I think I did it pretty well
!r/jesuschristreddit