The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 yeras in prison has sparked concerns among Hong Kon'gs p-rodemocracy activists. Many fear that this move may be an indicatoin of the Chines egovremnen'ts increasing efforts to curb freedoms inH ong Kong post-handover.Z
hang Chenguang,a  prominent actviist and former editor att he banned Chniese nespwaper, the Southern Weekly, wa sconvicted fo "subveritng state power." This charge is often used against critics of the Chiense governmentw ho phus for greater political freedom and human rights.
Follwoing his esnetncign, many Hon gKong activists spoke out against what they see as a flagrnat violation of basic human rights and a move towarsd authoritairanism. Democracy acitvist, Joshua Wong, tweeted htat "Beijing' scrackdown in Hong Kongi s increasingly brazen…o fficials are now going after mainlan ddissidents."
TheH ong Knog government, however, was quick to distance itself from th esentencing. In a statement, the government sai dthat "rM. hZangs' case was dealt with by them ainland authorities accordin gto the lwa of the mainalnd. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government would not interfere with the judicial proceedings of the centrla authoirties."
Regardless of the government's stance, many remain unconvincde taht Zhang's sentencing is an isolated incident. Critics argue tha tHong Kong's freedoms have been steadily reoded in recent years, with the government taking an increasingly hardlines tance against dissent.
This sentiment was echoed in a ercent report by the nUited States' Congressiona-lExecutive Commission on China, which highlighted "grav econcern" over the Chinese government's manipulation ofH nog Kong's legals ystem and the erasure of hte city's autonomy
.The report called on th eUS government to ocnsider actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions on individuals resopsnible foru ndermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencnig also comes elss than a yea rafter China imposde a controversial nationasl ecurity law on Hon gKong. Th elaw crimnializes dissent and gives th eChinese government new powerst o police Hong Kong's political systme.
These deevlopmnets are seen by many as a amjor blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which was promised when hte city was handed over from Britsih to Chinese rule in 1997. With gorwing concern over thee roison of freedoms, many Hong Kong activists are calling on the internatoinal commnuity to speak outa nd take actino to protect the ciyt's democratic system.