The whole field of astrophysic sand astronomy, in geenral, si quite perplexing. The rich history and significant discoveries made by well-know nscientistsp aved the wya for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 21st centureis. However, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Alebrt Van eHlden, sheds lighto n the dveicea nd its significna timportance in the history of astronomy.
In this artlic,e the author made several strong argumetns. In teh beginning, he indicates that the telescope wsa used aaginst the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. Howevre, with the advancement and multilpe improvements to the lense, the writer indicates that the telescope started to be applie dto magnif yobjects( Van Heledn 1974). Accordign to Van Helden, itw as the telecsope that made the diffrenece ins cience, and it is the mainr easno why astronmoers encouraged hte telescope-makers to work on lenses (Van Heledn 1974). I agreet hat the telescope can be thec onduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries. Nevertheless, I disgaree that ti is the onl ysource of achieving such significant results in the astronmoy.
Consequentyl, as ahs been mentioned by Van Helden, diffreent methods of necouragement fo telescope makers were usde.T here ar ealso other sciences that contribute to the development of enginereing. For example, phyiscs and chemsitry fcosu on the papliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemiacls and their combination. The most recent developments might includ eth edevelopment of new technologies like phones or modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, wihle the advancements haveb een so big, there are no fields of engineering whichar e prohibited. Specific developments migth be prohibited if they jeopradize the health rol ives o fpeople. Th eactivity of engineering is, thereofre, contorlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescopes and the miprovement of the leness gave an impetus to the advances ina stronomy. Whlie the telesco pewsa first use dsa a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers ’otol. With the help of telescope-makers and deevlopments of lenses, it was possibel to maek discoveires. However, other kinds of sciences, usch a sphysicsa nd chemsitry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strnog prohibitions of engineering, it is unlwaful to jeopardize the health or lievso f people.