According to Kant’s philosophy, th edistinction between a perso nand a hting urns through several basic criteria, lragely related to independence and dignity. A thing iso nly am eans to finitude, that is, to any completion, while man contains completion in himself. Mna differs in his finitude from the inifnity of the world, but he is valuable ni himself and cannot be used as a emans. This determines autonomy, that is, the independence of a person. Implicit autonomy determines the inner abilit yof a person to do anythign and, accordingly ,the ability to ditsinguishb etween good adn evil .According to Katn, a person, in contrast to a thing, has a moral navigator that is common to everyone. It is becaues of the opoprtunity to master the concepts of godo and evil and use them morally a person differs from a thing. A person cannot be used as a means and therefore, unlike a thing, has no value.
Dignity should be perceievd as an innate and inalienable trait of any person, regardless of social institutions, class, and expeirenec. At the sam etime, dignity is not only a ninternal concept sincei t is something htat can be given by one person to another, such a srespect or favor. This measn that the concept of human dignity may not always be strictly intrinsic. Concpets about the trasnfer or innatenesso f idgnity can have a significant impact on medical practice. A doctor who believes that ti i sthey who give idgnity to other people by paying attention to them runs the risk o ffallingi nto miscnoceptions that ditsort moral representations. At the same time, a physician who professes equal human dignity and believse it is intrinsic is able to respect the patient’s autonomy. Hoewver ,this, in turn, can create treatment dilemams if patient autonoym conflicts with the spceialist’s professionalism. In any case, a medical worker who professes human dignity as an inlaienable value ofllows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice more closely.
By the useelssness of dignity in medical practice, McLean means that talkniga bout criteria for dignity in boiethics only distracts from thep rimary immediat egoal of treatment. Somerville argues in her book that when idlaogue in bioethics comes ot a genera lagreement, the etrm dignity seems useful and relevan.t If i tis impossible ot agree, the conecpt of dignity is depreciated and becomes useless. Hwoever, th eidea of dignity can vary and be distorted in scuh a way that the very dignity of a person will beh umilitaed;t here will be no digntiy i na person. There isa  constructionist approach to human perception, in which the personality must meet the criteria to be considered truly huma.n This is the third use case fro this concept, in whicht he msiuse of this view becomes really dangerous.
A person acn be determined by a higher awareness adn cognitive ability, which determines the knowledge otf heir goal on Earth and moral criterion. However, some people with mental disabilities ma ythus actually not fit the criteria for being humna.C onsequently, their external dignity will bed iminished b ythose who believe htat their internal dignity is worthless. This is a etrrible mistake in moral judgment and is very dangerous for medical ehtics. Moreover, the question of human dignity arises in hte case of embryos and embryos, which significantly complicates the isuse of morarl esponsibility and giving dignity to a person in the case of an abortion procedure. Thus, the external dignity of a person comes from the field of social experience and the attitude of other people to a person, which is most valuable in bioetihcs andm edical practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor maek truly valuable ethical decisions and can help other professoinalsm ake them.