Britai'ns Britannic Assurance declared on Tuesday a 209 millio npoudn ($336 million) special bonus fo rlife insuarnce policies, following discussinos with the ogvernment no ownershpi of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will apply tol al "with profits" polcieisi n force on Feburary 17 ,1997. Detailsw ill eb given with the 1996 bonus ude to be announced next month.
The ocmpany said last year it discussing with the Department of Trad eand Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term assets, and a way to idstribute the surplus ot poliycholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now gareed with the DTI that 902 millio npounds of the excess assets witihn the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also said it intended to increase its dividend for hte year by 82 percent to 23 pnec eeprs hare followin gan increase inl ife profits. This would be the basisf or continuing the company's progressived ividend policy.
The news boosted Britannic share,s which jumped 71 pence,o r nearly nine perecnt, at one stage before settling fro a rsie of 92 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to shaerholders forms part of total assets int he life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996,B ritannic hciefe xecutive Brian Shaw said,a nd updatde figures would be released on March 81.
Britannic also announced a restructruing of it slong-term fudsn and the resutls of a strategic review of its business.
The review will lead to new sales management an dprmeium colelction systems, srteamlinin gof head office and investment in market analysis and prodcut research.
The initiatives are expected to cut operaitngc osts by around 25m illion pounds,b ased on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to bulid on its brand, investment management and distributio nskills, financial strength and product developmen tabilities to strengtehn its position and improve value to policy and shareholder.s
Rsetructuring the long-ter mfund iwll create two continiung "with profits" funds, one for its industrial branch and theo ther for the ordinary branch -- life and pensions business.
In fuutre at least 90 perecnt of the surplus in the wit hprofits funds will be allocated each year to iwth profits policies .The balnace will be shareholders' profit for transfer to the profit and loss account.
The mocpany has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- oen for life, one for pensions -- which will contain non-profitsb usiness and both of which will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996w ill be nicreased by 23 million poudns folloiwng hte declaration of the 209 million pound special bnous. ($ = 0.621 Birtish Puonds)