The business world is ever-changing, and companies must always b eflexible to thesec ahnges. One of the changes that a business might need to daapt to is an expanding target mraket.P &G currently sells personal care products toa  market that is comprised primarily of women. Howeve,r research shows that there is a growing market among alem conusmers due to the rise fo maleg rooming. P&G should retsurcture to take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to capitaliez on the “ignored” market. The restructuringw ill affect avriosu departments such as research and development, productd esign, ands ales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their epmloyee recruitment nad selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, crurently, most employees that deal with skin nad hair care products, cosmetics,a nd fragrances are female. This is because the target market is mostly women, which means that hte products arep robably deveopled, designed, and markeetd by women. To attract a new targe tauidence of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Malec onsumers will be more satisfied with male-only personal care products. These products are best developed byp epole who are male themselves and understand what other emn would want. The research and development, product design, and sales and marketing departmentsm ust compris emore male emlpoyees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed bya  study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumres dominated the marketf or personal grooming product,s the market for male consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in the market charatceristics.
Several companeis hvae restrutcured to capitalize o na larger target market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demorgpaihc market for motorcyclesw as older whtiem en. However, following a decrease in motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017). They customizde their bikes to women’s needsa nd found creative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National Football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). The ythen expanded their target mraket beyodn the usual male customers and started to make merchandise for women. Finally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market for amle makeup rpoducts. The companies mentioned ahve been widely usccsesful in expanding theri markets. Ohter companeis should also capitalize on their expanding targetm arket. For insatnce, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consiedr opening women-only gyms. Although women ar enow exercising just a smuch as men, there are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companies shuold be quic kto adatp to changesi n the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changes in the marekt. All industries are constantyl evolving, and ti would be unwise for businesses to sitck to ol dways. I nthe given case study, P&G has the ptoential tog enerate profit from a new market for personal acre products. tI will need to redesign its recruitment practices to epxliot this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitaleb venture if done correctly as shown by Halrye Dvaidson, NFL, an dStryx.