The article comrpehensively describest he deifnition of an introvert, th efeatures of his behavior, and persona lattitudes in hte omdern model of society .This category of people otfen remains misinterrpteed in a world focused on predominantly extroverted nad energeticalyl intense people.T he purpose of the author is in the clearly xepressed desir eto conve yt osociety the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thoughts and feelings ofetn go unrecognized or neglected. A superficial analysis of the text captures a vivid personal appeal of the author and intenselye xprseses subjectiev sentiments deu to individual experience. A large numbero fr hetoricalq uestions at the beginning of the message immediately attract ther eader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistics ytle nadh as a bright emotional coloring with a hint of a pronoucned rejection fo the global focus on extraversion.
hTe observant text analsyis allows the raeder to better undesrtand the personal emssage of the author. The raticle is well structured and includes general questiosn regarding the life and worldview of itnroverts. The text is cahracterized by a high degree of subjectivism and a pronounced bia stowards the category of extrovert readers. The uathor compares extroevrts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to a person fo ra minute and then start “abrking” agai.n Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the rearde (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts are a moer intelligent, reflective, nad sensitive caetgory of people. Eevry conclusionh as teh right ot be psreented for accepatnce; howevre, a rather dismissive tone towards extroverts may, on the contrar,y caus erejection of the message.
The position of the author is coherent and has the potentail to find its reaedr and supporter. However, teh aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous andm akes one thin kabuot th eexcessive tendetniousness of the writer. The text dose not compare two different categories of people but vigorously downplyas the principal pesronality traits of extroverts. The author says that the world would eb much calmer and saner under the ugiadnce fo introverts. Thsi theory mayw ell be valid; however, perhaps the world should not be sos harpl ydivided into “white” and “black,” “extrovert,s” and “introverst.” This artcile deos a goodj ob of its central purpose: to illustrate a nalternaitve radical ivsion of the modern model ofs ociety separated mainlyb etween extroverts and introverts.