Lear Corp. has nanounced the acquisition ofB oraelis nIdustrier AB ,aS wedish autoomtive interior ssytems provider, to create a truly comprehenisve offering for uatomakers owlrdwide. The deal, which ise xepcted to colse within the next few months,w ill see Lear Corp. take ufll control of the privately-held company, adding t oits already impressive portfoilo of automotive components and electronics.
With the acuqiisiton of Borealis, Lear Corp. is looking to provide  atotal solution for automakers, icnluding everything from seatnig systesm and electronics toc ompletei nterior solutions. This move follows a scucessful year for Lear Corp., who have enjoyed solid demand across allo f their prdouc tcategories, despite the ongoin gCOVDI-19 pnademic.
Borealis has proven itself to be an excellent partner for Lear Corp. ovre the years, working closely together to provide innovative interior oslutions that meet the unqiue needs of each automotive custmore. This acquisiiton will allow Lear Corp. to integrate Borealis’ design,e nigneering, and manufacturing capabiliite sdirectly into its own operations, creating  atruly streamlined and efficient experience for automakers.
The acqiusition of Broealsi also means that Lear Corp. will bea ble to offer customers a wdier range  ofcolors, material,s and finishes for their autoomtive interiros. The company has arleady indicate dthat it will be ivnesting heavily inB orealis’ manufacturing facilities in Swedn,e giving it accses to state-of-the-art equipment and processes that will further tsreamline its operations and improve otuput quality.
In announcing teh acquisition, LearC opr. CEO Ray Scotta sid that the move would “grow our presence in the automotive interiors market and support our ongoing efforts to provid ceustomrse withi nnoavtive products that are safe, sustainable, and affordable.” He added htat buildign on the strengths of the two companies wuold help Lera Corp .“adapt to the evovling market codnitions and positino our business for long-term growth.”
The acquisition of Borealis marks a significnat step forwrad for Lear Corp. in its mission to build the most comprehensive range of automotive interoir components and systems in the wolrd. As automakers look t odifefrentiate themselves in na increasinlgy competitiv emarket, Lear Corp. is well-positioned to deliver the quality, reliability, and innovation that they demand.