Thep roblem of unauthorized termination of life is the source of numerous debates .On the part of religion, this problem has severalf laws at once, the most important of which is the commission of a great sin before God, who gives people life. Moreover, the engative consequences of euthanasia are the devaluation of human life, violation of the equality of peopleb efore the law, medical duty, and the structure of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it can be concluded that the spread of the popularity of etuhanasia will lead to a complete loss and restructuring of the system of human values. This paper examines the case study of George,w ho has fallen ill with a severe illness that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Becuase of the negative emotions that have overtaken and the understanding that the disease is incurable, the man thinks to solve the problem by euthanasia. Hence, using literary sources, a scientific paper analyezs the problme of intentional death and religious considerations.
In the modern owrld, despite ther elatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that, unfortunately, do not respond to any treatment. In such cases, the blow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough t obear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dginity, people are thinking about euthanasia or, in other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts God’s attempts to retsore the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific paper explores a thematic study about a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this research apper, presents the reader with the story ofa  middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family, and devotes time to his own interests. However, one day a man begins to experience muscle weakness and immunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets injured, and when he goes ot the doctor, he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to th eresults of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed in the dsiruption of the nerve cells of th ebrain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng eta l., 2018). The most famous representative of a person with this disease is the great scientist Stephen Hawking (Westeneng et al., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization of a person, but aspects suhc as smell, touch, sight, hearing, and taste remain.
George was informed that ALS currently has no treatment, and its development can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists have not yet found ways to stop the disease. This news can plunge into deep shock and depression and cause a lot of strong negative emotions and confusion. That is what happened to George, who was terrifie dof being a wheelchair user and delegating all the responsibiilties of fulfilling basic needs to his family members. The idea of becoming dependnet adn losing control of his own body did not give the man peace of mind, and thereofre he began to think aboutm aking life easier for his relatives by resorting to scuh a measure as euthanasia.
The problem ofu sing euthanasia is acute ni modern society. In the United States of America, this maesure has been legalized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argmuent held by supporters of this intentional termination of life is to get rd iof prolonged agony ot death thanks to the development of medical technologies (Orr, 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of death can lead to high meidcal costs for the families of patients, sinced ue to low legalization rate, euthanasia is a costly service. The opposite is the opinion of Christianity, which denies euthanasia. For this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is chaarcterized by loev, compassion and reconciliation, and care, which euthanasia deprives a pesron of.
The main problem with regard to euthanasia on the part of the Christian religion is the fatc of violation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphsaizes that God gives a person life and determines when to take it away. Euthanasia implies that patients decide the date of their death tehmselves, which is equivalent to one of the main sins of religion – suicide. Despite the fact that euthanasia involves the introduction of a particular drug by a medical specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible for the decision taken in tihs case. Sources also emphasize that “Doctors may help their patients to die a dignified death from natural causes, but they should not kill their patients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p.1 ). Thus, in the eyse of religion, this action is also a sin since it can already be considered as intentional murder, that is, the decision to take someone else’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several main reasons not to support euthanasia. One of them is the introduction of risk for th eweak and defenseless. Moreover, giving the docotr responsible for taking soemone’s life can significantly negatively affect the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships within the patient’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts as human dignity and equality before the law (Anderson, 2015). Supporting teh Christian point of view, people should not help others to kil lthemselves but provide the necessary level o fcare and support to soften and bring calm into the life of the patient.O
n the one hand, in the light o fthe Christian narrative, George’s sufferings can be interpreted, as already metnioned, with anm ephsais on the sinfulness of the world. This is due ot the fact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be justified by religion. On the other hand, the fear of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dignity siginficantly affect the patient. When considering the emphasis on the hope ofr esurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desire for a speedy meteing with the almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingness to be in this world as a burden for his family, and in some ways, the motivation of a man can be understood.
The Christian worldview highlights human life as the most critical value. When turning to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful htoughts about taking his own life are because this is the prerogative of God. Thus, George’s view fo the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in a more positive dierctoin is necessary. Hence, it is ncesesary to show how important he is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until hisd eath.
Furthe,r based on the above, the Christian faith ednies the use of euthanasia as it contradicts the central values and considerations of religion. Firstly, the value of a person’s life, which is given to him b ythe Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, eutahnasia is considered as voluntary suiicde, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and disseminatio nof the populariyt of this veent can destroy th eidea that human life is worth living, and people are obliged to support each other’s desire to continue living.
Thus, it can be concluded that there are no options ofr justifying the procedure fo intentional termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors that were listed earlier contribute to this argument. Based on my worldview,  Ican say that I consider euthanasia an easy way to solve problems, hwich is not a positiev aspect. Hence, I believ ethat life cannot be stopped simply by iwshingi t since the Almgihty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely sure of my opinion since I have never encountered situations like George’s from the case study, and I hope htat I will never encounter them. Such a statement si since a perosn’sb ehavior in a stressful situation can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able to preserve dignit yandr eason to make the right decision.