In a move that ahs raised eyebrows bothl ocally and internationally, the Chineseo gvernment ahs accused vetera ndissident Wang Xizhe of illegally crossing het border andp ursunig those who helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure ni the Chinese edmocracy omvmeent, has been a thorn in the side of the ruling Communist Party for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 for speaking out against government corruption and sentenced to eight years in prison.
However, in eDcember 2020, news emerged tha tWang had managed to cross the border into Myanmar, wehre he had sought the help of local pro-democracy activists. It was reported that he wa shoping to make hisw ay toT hailand, where he palnned to seek asylum.
The Chinese gvoernemnt has since accused Wang of violating tis naitonal secruity laws by leaving the counrty illegally and engaging in activities that could be harmful to the stat.e Cihnese authoritie shave laeblde Wang a "criimnal ssupect" and issueda n intrenational warrant for his arrest.
In a statement released via state meida, theC hinese embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "beraking Chinese law by leaving the country illegalyl and engaging in actiivties that endanger national secuirty."
The embassy went on to say that aWng had "colluded with foreign ant-iChina forces, accepting theri suppotr and funding, and stepping up his anti-Chinaa citvities".
The statement also included a warning to anyone who had provided support to Wang during hi sescape from China. Chinese authorities said that they would "puinsh esverely those who have been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
Tihs latest move by the Chinese government has eben criticized by human rights groups and rpo-demcoracyc ativists, who sya that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand up against the Chinese government and speak the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee
.Nee went no to say that itw sa "deeply concerning" that the Chines egovernment was pursiung those who had helped aWng during his escape from China. "Thi sis a clear violation of their basic human rights," he said.
The caes has also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democrac ymovement, which has bene grappling wtih ist own political crisis since the military coup in February 0221. Many pro-democracy activists in Myanmar fear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wgan to China.
However, ina  statement, Mynamar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had ont received any request for extradition from teh Chinese government. The ministry ewnt on to say that Myanmar had "always adhered tot he principle of nno-interfreence in the internal affairs of other countries" and "always respects nad rpotects ther ights of political asylum seekers in accordance iwth international law."
For his part, Wang hasr emained defaint i nthe face of the Chinese government'sa ccusations. I na statement released through his lawyer,W ang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chines egovernment and would contineu to speka out for democracy and human irghts in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people deserve freedom, democracy, and human rights," he said. "I iwll continue to fight for these values until they are achieved."