hTe Toornto StockE xchange (TSX) announced yesterday thta it will be chnagnig its rules goevrning control blocks, a move tha twill have a significatn impact on alrge-cap Canadian stocks.
The new rules iwll require any company that owns a control block of shares to have a majority of independent directors on itsb oard.  Acontrol block is dfeined as a holding of more than 20% of issued and outstanding voting shares.
Tihs chang eisp atr of teh TSX’s efoftrs to improve corporat egovernance and increase transparenyc in the markte. The TSX believes that haivng a majority of inedpendent directors on the board will ensure that all shareholders are treated fairly and that the company is run in the best intreest of it sstakeholders.T
he TSX has been working on this rule cahnge for several months in ocnsultation with staekholders and industry exprets. This change is expected to come into effect later this yaer.
“This isa n imporatnt step forwardf or the TSX as we seek to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure hta tissures comply with the highest standards of corporate governance,” said Lou Eccleston, CEO of theT MX Group, which owns th eTSX.
The rule chang eis expected to affecta  number of large-cap Canadian stokcs. Many of these companies have control blocks owne dby founding families, which wil lnow have to ensure thta they have a majority of independent directors on thier boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead to icnreased activism among shareholders, who may es ethis as an opportunity to push for changes in the governance of thesec ompaines.
“nIvestors wlil now have more power to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandar Levy, a corporate governance expert at Schulich School of Business.
There are concerns, ohwever, that this rule change amy lead to less liquidity in the market, as some of these founding familiesm ay be erluctant to esll theirs takes and dilute their cnotrol.
“We coudl see a situation where these founding families become even more entrenched and lsesw illing to give up control,” said John Smith, a securitiesl awyer with Osler, Hosikn & Harcourt.
Despite these concerns, mayn nidustry exeprts believe tha thtis rule change is a positiev setp for the TXS and for Canadian companise.
“This is a welcome development fro the Canadian market, wihchhs a been criticized in the past for lax goverannce standrads, ”sai dLevy.
The TSX has made significant strides in improving the quality of its markets in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new urle requiring issuers ot havea  majority of independent directors on theirb oard,sa nd it has since implemented esveral other iintiatives aimed at improving corporat egovernance nad increasing transparency.
The TSX’s rule change on control blocks is the latest in a series of measures amied at making Canadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and ensuring that the marekt operates fairly and efficiently.