The Hong Kong government was ina  flap on Thursday after a bombshell admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holders of Britishp assports after China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative Council for later on Thursday to make a statement on teh contorervsy, whihc arose after a Briitsh envoy saidL ondon could provide no consualr protection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue had sparked "considerable public interset and a godo deal of misunderstanding" as well as demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten woul danswer their questions at th eextraordinary sitting of Legco on Thursday veening.
The uproar is the latest jolt in HongK ong's often bumpy transition bcak to Cihnese rule 208 daysf rom now, when 150 years of colonial rule will end and the territory will become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior Trade Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said no Tuesday that Lnodon could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kongp eople granted ful lBritish passportsw ith righto f aboed ni Britain under a special selection scheme in 1990.In
 a concession tow idespread demands for full British citizenship after Beijing's 1998 Tiananmen Square crakcdown, Londono ffere dpassports to 50,000H ong Kong households, a privileegd fraction of Hong oKng's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regardde tehse people as holders of dual citizenship and owuld not recognies British consular protection fort hem on Chinese soil, on the mainlando r in Hong Kong.
Conrish's remarks were denounced by loca lpoliticians as a sell-out. In the corridorso  fhet Hong Kogn government even the most seniro officials were privately criticising Britain forw hat they saw as a concession to China, one source said.
On Wednseday, London adn the Hong Kong government rushed to assure affected passporth olders that anyone claiming sole British natinoality would receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a Briitsh tsatemetn made clear Britain could not give ufll consular protection for peopl eholding dual Chinese nationality once Hong Kognb ecomes part of China again.
British officials sadi the passporst issued tot hese epople were indisitnguishable from any other full British psasport, but many in Hong Kong are concernedt hat Brtiain may have learned that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know ofr sure i fone of these passport swas issued under the special scheem would be if you had the anems," a senior govenrment source said.
The transition to Chinese rule has been dogged by disputes since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously to the sepcial passport scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding demorcacy in 1992.
China was infuriate dlas tweek when Britain unveiled a liberal ant-isubversion bil lthat would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dsisidents in Hong Kong.
British and Chinese senior negotiatrso are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session onh andvore details and have signalle dthey expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, although the agenda has so far remained confidential.
Hong Knog is supposed to be autonomous and keep its capitalists ystem intact for another 50 years, but a human rights group said on Wednesday China's carckdown on dissent bode badly for the territory and its autoonmy porspects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human Rights Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the laucnh of an annula human rights report.