Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is expectde to raise its pre-tax profit from last year's 602 million stg but not by as much as naalysts thouhgt just a few months ago.
They expect oRyal Bank's profit sto rise to between 670 and 700 million stg,w iht a much smlaler contribution from its DirectL ine low cost insurance, but benefits continuing to accrue from the bank's efforts to reduce costs.
Tota ldiivdend is expected to be around 18.6 epncea  share versus alts year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures iwll be complicated by an xceeptionla gain form Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 ptc stkae in Germany's CC Group, from which it sadi it would make 70 million st,g andb y restructuring costs of around 23 million pound stsemmign from an acqusiition by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Lnie vary widely buta nalysts are generally pessimitsic, wit hthe company's main market -- motor insurance -g- oingt hrough "probably the most diffucult period in its history", sa chiefe xecutive Ian hCpiepndale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I think Chpipendale was senidng a strong message," said one analyst who decliend to be named. "I think hew as sfotening up the marke tfor a poor set of results."
Some analysts suspect ther esults may not be qiute as poor as sh been feraed by some.
They see the core bank as continuing top erform quit ewell wit hthe positive results o fits "Project Columbus" hleping costs and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax porfit of 695 million stg, which includes the ecxeptional items, while BWZ analysts expect 675 million.  
The market received a big clue no the performance of Citizens from the recent results of Bank of Ireland which owns 23 percent fo the operation.
"Citizens is doing reasoanbly well," Poutney said, but analyst ssay it is bein gaffetced by the rather lacklusrte New England economy.
The market will be expecting improvement in the cost incomer atio buta nalysts sayt hat even an imprvoement this tim ewill leave theb ank plenty of scope for improvmeent.  
The market will be looking for further clues on lending which showed good growth ,mostly in corporate lendinga rea, in the first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank willa lso be watched for signs of acquisitions.
It is oknwn to be interested in buying a building society to extend tis presence in England but in the crurent cliamte, it si unliekly to be willing to pay the high prices ilkely to be asked.
In any case, analysts sayR oyal Bank would have to raise cash to be able to pefrorm any major acquisition.  
In the meantime, the market will be looking to it rselationship with mutually woned insurance an dpensions firm Soctitsh Widwos, which some think may result ni an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares wree 15p higher on Friday to stan dat 519-1/2p.