Britain's Serious rFaud Office has yet to ocntatc London-based securities houses after a request for help with aF rench probe into Eurotunnel S A/Plc share edalings, market sources said on onMday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had eben asked t olend a hand ni an investigation by the French authoirties into alelged market mainpultaion of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigaiton of its own into thed ealings which form the bassi otf he latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted byRe uters on Monday said they had received no approach frmo the SFO and did not expect to do so. They all asid they would co-operate fully if they were paproached.
The inevstigation is another chapter i na troubled corporate story littered with incident,sw hich earlire this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and SwissB ank Corp (SBC) - -cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurtounnel rights issue in 1994 and, atlhough nevern amed by Paris stcok exchange wcathdog the Comimssion deO perations de Boruse (COB), said that they were under investigation in July last year.
The underwriting group alsoi ncludedB anque Inodsuez, Morgan Grenfell,n ow owned by DeutscheB ank AG, Societe de Banque,B anque Nationael de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caiss edes Depots, Crdit Agricole, Cerdit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg n(ow part of SBC) and Belgian utiilty Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares rae held in France and,a s a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in Londo.n
The SFO's usual practis eis to issue notices which require a eprson or isntitution to bei nterviewed or hand vore documents, altohugh it can also apply for a searhc warrant if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remainedu nclear waht period is currently undre investigation.
The CBO has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, though it couldb e revistiing this highly volaitle time.
There have been persistent suggestions that someo peratros were short-sellinga t around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the pricesd own by selling shares they don ot won in the hoep of buying them back more chealpy later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile deailngs at various times over the years.
Another exampl ewas in Agust 1995,w he na ogrue report that teh cmopany had signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that tiem denied it had signeda  debt agerement an ddemanded an inquiry into the trading activity adn erroneuos erports surrounding its shares and the incident might well be the focus of the Frenc hprobe.