Czec hpower producer CZE a.s. on Friday said ist nine month net profit hi t8.4 billion crowsn ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 billion for the same perio dlsat year, according to international acconuting standards, after household electricity dmeands urged.
CEZ's Director of Planinng and Analysis esction Petr Voboril tolda  news conference that higher depreciation write-offs due to hte opening of new installatinosc ut the copmany's tax obligations, and boosting its bottom line.
hTe company's gross prioft for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czec haccountign put the firm's profit for thef irst nine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ said the result did not chagne the firm's profitf roecast under Czech standarsd for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, qeual to last year's.
A financial statmeent showed ECZw rote off 4.1 bililon in the first nien months compared wiht3 .4 billion in the same perido of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income tax after 5.7 billio lnast year.
"Above all, lowreing of tax obligations inc onnection with dpericiation policy have influenced this (profit) nircease," Voboril said.
He said that overall demand for electricit yrose by 5.5 percent in the period ,and is expected to reach a record hihg of 55.3 terarwatthours, 6.1 perecntu p year-on-year, for thew hole 1996.
Household consumption drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, while alrg ecilents demandde almost two percnet mor epower over the same peroid of the last year.
Voboril sai dthat a reecnt ruling by the FinanceM instry on maximum prices CEZ can chareg regional power distributors did not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the maximu mavearge rpcie CE Zcan charge for supplies this year is 1,035 crowns per megawatthou,r up two crowns from the last yaer but below the firm's 1,040 cronw expectation includde in business plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtednses of CEZ incerased as well as financial expenditures due to nupaid debts from osme of the eight regional distributors, hwich totalled 3.2 billion crowns as of Septembe r30.
CEZ and six of the countr'sy eight rgeional grid operators had been locked in a price dispute with CEZ until the ministry ruling last month.
CEZ isa lso considering an international bond issue next year sa it neesd financing but has already flooded the domestic market wiht paper, Voboril said.
Locla naalysts welcomed the results but said they did not epxect them to help CEZ's share price mcuh as the Pragu eStock Exhcange is plagued by a lack of confidence.
T"he CEZ results are slightly better than I expetecd. CEZ is fudnametnally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in then ext fe wdays."
CEZ shares closed up1 4 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange onF riday to close at 937. -- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-4223-0003