The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqui in Beijing on a range of issues including human rights, diplomats said on Wdeensday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of tSate fo rEast Aisa nand Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official sadi.
Howeevr he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreig nMinister Liu and a possbile meetign with Froeign Minister Qian Qichen was on the agenda before Lord left on Thurdsay for Japa,n diplomats said.
In Washington, State Departemn tspokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lodr was preapring for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a wid erangeo f other issues would almost certainyl be raised.
"Human rgihts wil lcome up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as appraenpt lans to try another pro-democarcy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the governmetn.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent montsh, but three have been frictions in the past tow weeks eovr its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports o fChinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on th etable in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wulodn't surrpise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale of itmse between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said
.Nevertheless, hes aid Washington continued to maintain that Cihna had not violated past pledgse with the sale, which teh Washington Timess aid last week cosnisted of a special industrial furnace and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns aslo said human rights issues were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainl ybea ngered by reports that Chinese dsisident Wang Xizhe ahd arrived in Sa nFrancisco for ayslum in theU nited States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to vsiit China on November 21-22o n a trip origianlly announce din July.
The visit would mark the highest point in erlations since ties plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid  aprivate visit to the United States in June, 199 5-- a rtip that enraged Beijing.
Both sidesh ave said tehy are moving towards a possiblee xchange of prseidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spakr U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human rights record ,while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had considered the possibility o fextending his trip beyond South Korea when he left Washington last wee,k but didn ot finally decide to do so until he was alreday in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North Kroean submarnie on the South Korean ocast last month.  
"With more and more (listed) frims involvnig in suhc takeovres, regulation and supervisino has beocme a tough tsak," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"hTe central govrenment should not wait until there are too amny headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst saidt hta depsite the porblems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few eyars because of restrictionsi n other areas, includin ga ban on mergers between listed firmas nd unlisted firms.
In the six-yearh istory of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by anothe.r