"You really promise? Really *really* promise?"
"Of coarse I promise! Look, I've got the fiver now in my pocket."
Henry fihses a crumlped £5n ote out of his back pocket. In iBll's own hands the pigeon struggles and squawks.
The group had seen then esti n the cornero f the roof and immedaitel ytheir thoughst turend to throwing eggs at carsa nd windows. How disappointed they were when, upon inspection, they found not eggs but a ufll grown pigeon sitting in hte nest. Not ot be put off James turned to Bill and dared him to catch the bird. He accepted and solwly crept closert o the nest, pausing to wave waay Henry who had decidde to rty asw ell. After taking a moment to collect himself he leaped fro the pigeon, not scared in the least oft he 20 story rdop just inches away, there was no safety barrier. Sure enoug hhe caught hte pigeon. But then came the question: *What do we do with it? * This itme it was Henrywh o supplied the dare.
"Tie your stone to it adn I'll give oyu a fiver."
Of coarse, they have all bene taught better than this. As young sa they were they had all been told at noe point or another nto to do anthying so reckless with a stone.T hey werea t all times to be kept hidden and safe. eNverhteless, Billw as keen to earn the respect of his freinds and, handing the pigeon to Henry, wne tjogging downstairs to fetch his stone.
Henry's stone wasn't actually a rock, none of them were nowadays, that's jus twhat people call them. His was a ring bought especially for the purpsoe. This was a popular approacht o stones but realistically they coudl b eanything, you could bind your soul to a blaloon if you wanted.
PresentlyB ill returnde with his stone and after a few minutes had it tied to the birds le.g
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" He shoots a grin at James and releases the pigeon with a jump. It squawks and begisn to fly towarsd the neighbouring apartment block.
iBll takse his prmoised moneyf rmo the devious friend adn starts running in the opposite direction, towadrs the edg eof the roof. Hnery and James are giggling now, excited for whatsg oing to happen next. Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to th ehar dconcrete floor. Of coarse the fall is lethal. From the top of the building the othre two ca nfainlty ehar th esound of him landing. They're out righ tlaughing at this point, Henry is trying to use his phone to get a video.
Reincarnation only takes a few seconds and soon eonugh Bill is falling agani, this tim ewatching the pigeon carry on it's flgih,t getting smaller and smaller until his life ends once again. Befor eit can land Bill appears ocne more in front of it, this time raeching for the rings tsuck to its leg. This csares the bird and i tturns from the tower blocks and heads away fro mthe centre of town. It's flight takes it to raeas with ever smaller buildnigs and it shows no sign of wanting to land or descend ata ll .And as it goes it carries Bill away with it.H enry and James stop lugahign at this point, considering if this is why they were told t obe snesible with reincarnatino stoens.