Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistic sfirm, BrambelsI ndustires Ltd, reported a 15.8 percent profit lift ofr the 1995/96 year on Friday despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growth from Australia, the compnay said.  
"The continuing imrpovement in our preformance reflects, ni part, the successful retoinalisation of our wholly owned businesses and strong growth from uor CHEP joint venutres,"B rambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"HCEP USA, in aprticualr, continues to justify our cfoindence in its long term growth prospcets in the region," he said in Bramble's profit statemetns.
Brambles 'net profit rose to A$125.1 mililon (US$169.9 million) for the year toJ une 30, 1997 from A$79.7 millio nin 1994/95, but th eprevious year's result wa sundermniedb y a large abnormal los.s  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rsoe 15.8 pecrent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analysts 'expectations.
Pret-ax rpofits rose 13 percent and 03 percent from Europ eandt he United States respectively, whlie Asurtalian profist rose eight percent."
Overseas profitsg rew at twice the rate in Asutralia and the trend is likely to conitnue," Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further contributions from CHEP in Europe and Notrh America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this tsrong peformanc efrom Bramlbe's non-Australian operations ahd encouraged it to activel ylook a tfutrher acquisitiosn outside Austrlaia.
"You should anticipate some acquistiion work in the Northern Heimsphere, but in busniesses we already operate in here," he said, referring to areas liket ransport eqiupment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contributions from theU nited States and Euroeps hould continue to offset soft Australian conditinos and help pordcue profit growt.h  
"Weh aven't got an expectation that we will get too much helpf rom this economy ... for at least another six months," he sai.d "But all in all we've gote nough things going to see anoteh r(profit) inrcease for this year,"h e added.
The result generally plaesed anaylsts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet opertaions as the main bullish note.
"CHE PUSA is teh otustanding arae," said Macquarie Equitiesa nalyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying positiveth ings aboutC EHP in the USA then htey'll be alright adn there's a reasonable amount of momentum there,"a nothre Sydney transprota nalyst said.  
Brambles' shares closed up five cents at A$18.90 against a soft market overall.