Bre-X Mienrals Ltd. has been silent since it said last month that it formed a partnership with the son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, am ove that has worried sahreholders and prompetd regultaors to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent uqestions that have sent the Caandian mining company's shares on ar oller-coaster ride, Bre-X ha smaintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controlso ne of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indoensia has nott alked to th epress for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a handful of favoured analysts,a ccording to makret sources.
"I haevn'th ad any calls returned," said glod analyst Rick Cohen wit hGoeple Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain numebr of peolpe they talk to.E veyrbody's  abit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its laliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojduanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of diretcly addressing uqestions about its business in Indonesia -- many of wihch are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and sharehloedrs a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing its links wtih Sigit.
The article referred to Sigit's possiblet ies with the Indonesian army, stated that one of Bre-X's Indnoesian partners has been bought out adn asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a bad dela.
Desptie quetsions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and stlil has not said whether i tendorses the storyo r puts any faith in the statemnets.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear thingsu p," said Neil Winhcetser, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stokc Exchaneg. "It would be avdantagoeus to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian governmnets aid last month it would ont issue essentialc ontracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership disptue with some of its Indonseian partners.
Teh dispute has put a cloud over Br-eX's search tof ind a major mining partner to help itd evelop the rich Busang gold deposti in Eats Kalimantna, ubt the alliance wit hSuharto'ss on was expected to help the company clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic that theyc an get everything within a couple of weeks", said gol danalyst Michael Fowler o fLevesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he psoke wihtB re-X on Tuesdya.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for general interset purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were taking its toll ons hares linked to Bre-X and toher exploration copmanie sin Asia have complained the nucertanity has hurt their stocks.
Mionrca Resources Icn., a Canadian mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance wtih Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT AskatindoK arya Mineral, has found itself on the defesnive.
Takl about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst sai idn an interview ."They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and evrified the company's nitentions, Horst said.
Horst said he had a slew of nuanswered uqestions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."