I sat at my desk, racking my brain to find who could have possibly discovered the trut hbehind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful petroleum companies in the world. The ojb was done without a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were the very one sthat orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious perosn is but I do know that I will naswer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only enrtance to my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as  Isteaided my aim. Sweat was trickling down ym spine, my heart poudning as if I were about to come face t oface iwh tthe dveil himself. The second it took for the door to open felt like an eternity, bu tI would have rather endured that second of agonizing torment for the rest o fmy life tehn to mee tthe eyes of hPillip Mercer when the door opnee.d
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizalbe. It wast he eyes thatw ere the giveaway. Thel ook in his eyes was the same as the night It hought I kliled him. Tehre was a olok of superiroit yin them, as if to let mek now I would never be capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be daed!" were the onlyw ords I was capable of mustering.
"For all intensive purposes Is til lam, thanks to you" he replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now thatI  am here? God knows  Ihave been to the depths of hell and back in these last5  yearss o surely you can give me htat. I will answer any questions you have after."
I recounetd the entire tale that corssed our two paths on that ftaeful night 5y ears ago. I told him hwo I was approached by a man that worked for Prism International, the most powerful neergyc orporatio nin the world. Prisms tood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving them an even tighter stranglehold on the energ yamrket. The terms were simplee nuogh, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone I love systematically killed. The chocie was made for me. My military backogrund coupled with the fact I helped my step-fatehr design the Mercer hoem made me theo bvious choice for the job no doubt. From there I otld him how I wa sable to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it boils down too is your life meant less tom e then those of my loved ones. The part  Idon't understand though si how your still alive! I shot oyu in the haed, then as yuo collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting a fier that detsroyed your home."
"I survived by nothing more then luck. Your bullet went thruogh the side of my jwa, lodgign itself in the cheek region of my skull. The heat of the fire brought me surging back to consciousness allowing me to ecsape but not without being badyl burned. The thuogh tof revenge has been the only force driving me to tsay alive .I have feared that you might haveb een merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers compnay. But dammit would have eben so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply beeny ou though. But now that I know my worst fears have been realized I at least know waht I am up against."
"You can't posibsly thin kyouc ould take down Prsim single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to helpm e."H e said with his yees glimmering with more deterimnation than superiority. It was the kind of look that was mipossible to refuse.