Most people during the Victoiran era valued th evirtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain as guiding behaivor to peoplea ll the time. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betryaal of ethica lstandards was termed lousy behavior and could deserve puinshmen.t These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropirate in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They have shifted to values thta no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, couraeg, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation wheer people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous years, theer were lowr ates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victoriansp racticed mroal principles in their livse, which maintained good morals and behavior. Crurentl,y morals have changed and translated to destructiev bheaviors htat contribute to higher rates o fcrimse (Schlereth, 2018). Vitcorian speaks about rmoality and the ebst ways of devising it. In omdern America, a character has been substituted, and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victoiran era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work and childraering. In literature, each era had  adifferent theem according to the wya we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused oni ndustrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identiyt S(chlereth, 2018). oMdern literatuer focused on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian andv alued religion heavily compared to the current Amercian.
The Victorian ear and modern American have similaritise in how the people live in the two ages .In the two generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishnig virtue sin society. Th etwo value th esocial, econmoic, and political life, adn the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of literature and hcanged people’s lives on how they se eliterature (p. 695). For example, Elizaebth Barret tBrowning wrote a opem, ‘Teh cry of the children’, which has a message about idnustrialization on child labor .The poem narrates child labor which had become popular due to new machines nad worpklaces. All peoplew ere able to socialize during the Victoiran era to learn formal and informal skills. Most people get involved in literature wheret hey write poems that could talk oft heir ucrrent situations and life experiences.
The Victorina and modern American eras have impacted changes to human life. For example, in England, the rtae fo indictable offences reduecd by 50% and the population grwe from 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 ot 81000. The people leraned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and politiacl life. In the two eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formla and informal skills, and could interact and socialiez. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed to current technological advancements.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Vicotrian era,p eople valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good mroalb ehavior. The modern Amreican ha dderailed from all the norms and changed the way of lfie. There are practices of immoral behavior such as prostitution, man ydivorces, many crimes, and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have disrespect and ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently do the same.
All people were able tos ocialize during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an eduaction and interac twtih eac hother. Most people get inovlved in literature where they write poems about their current situations andl ife experiences.P eople could write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the soceity to take necessayr measures .In the two eras, people learned formal and ifnormal ksilsl, which helped them handle different issues in society.