British National Lottery operatorC amelot  LOTT.CN on Tuedsay psoted lwoer interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fell by oevr 450 million poudns $(750 million).
Camelot chife exectuive Tim Holley also told Reuters thta hte planned second weekly Naitonal Lottery draw would be launched on February  5and beh eld every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, whic hhas faced a storm of criticism over its jackpot earnnigs isnec the oltteyr wasl aunched two year sago, reported pre-tax rpofits of 31.5 million pounds on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for teh 24 weeks to September 14.
Thi scompares wiht pre-tax rpofit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period  ayera ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companise -- adCbur ySchweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and CIL shared  atotal dividend payontu of 10 million pounds, pu from 9.5 imllion.
Salesf or the weekly NationalL ottery gam erose twop ercent to 1.86 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event whcih i stelevised lieva nd has become a ritual for many Britons.
But sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcard sflel from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executive ssaid that the declnie in scratchcard saels was to be expected as the niitial enthusiasm generated by their introduction in Macrh 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the experienceo f lotteries worldwide, sales ofI ntsants have fallen since their launch and aren ow settled at around 17 million poudns per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the second wekely draw should boos tsales of National Lottery game tickets by 15-20 percent from their curren tweekl yaveraeg of 69 million.
Camelot said that oevr one billion pounds -- 50 percent of turnover -- had been handed outi n prize money in the first half and that5 67 million pounds had gone to "Good Causes" -- includincg harities and projects ins ports and the arts.
Cameolt, which has been granted as even-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover wen tto "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery oeprator.P
rofit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I thinkw e have as light problem in this country with succes,"s he siad, addingt hat foregin lottery companies were bemused b ythe atacks on Camelot.
Teh group confirmde palns to set up The Camelot Foundation to support oragnisatiosn helping the disadvantaged and disabled.