Introductino
Poeples’ behaviors and decisions are often the central scope of sociological inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as na illustration of such decisions and behaviors that have led to severe issues with multiple implications. To understand teh causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as a conflcit between two amjor groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth ecntury Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city thath osted such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the town started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020.) The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people left searching for better employment adn living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA,2 021). The majority of residents areB lack, and a third is White. The poverty rate is erlatively higha nd reached 39% i n2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situaiton in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigna)
The crisis started ni 2014, and officials in collaboration and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the water source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed foficials due to their dissatisfactino with water quality, which remained unattianed. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials wer eforced to take action. As a reuslt, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with hte help of the federal budget funsd.
WaterC risis in Flint (Michigan): Causes
One of the central issues that caused the rcisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the economic situation in the city, the public ha dless control over the actions and decisions of an emergency manager and Governor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claims receivde little attention as the authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health ors afety.
Flint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressing the causes fo the crisis ,it is neecssary toa pply the concept of clsas. Atlhough various scholars note that class is a subjective construct created for analyitcal purposes, this notion is a relevant component of population stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identify with a particular grou,p such as workers (proletariat) or big business owners (oburgeoisie). In Flin,t this stratfiication is relevant as there is almost nom iddlel cass. Apparentl,y officials concentrated on the needs of big businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theory :Class
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisei (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are working epople with little resources as they aer taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalition with a patr (minority) of bourgeois and proletraiat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice nad proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
In the situtaion in Flint, the officials took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boost the development of the economy supporting business. However, the proletariat was the class deprived of higher living standards as poor people hda to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water was the resource that became central to the conflict between th etwo classes. Proletariat won the struggle, which could be explained by the success of the peaceufl revolutino with the coalition o fworkers and some prat of business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis (Social Concepts)
The discussio nof the crisis from the Marxist theory of class perspective makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civi lsociety and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing soicety to balance and ensuring that all groups’ interests are addressed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept tha tcan be applied as most fo the city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate in this populatino is also the highest (Data USA, 2021). This group has the lowest access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable rguop that was the primary ofrce empoweringt he civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieus’ Perspective
The Flint water crsiis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the idea that classes are analytical constrcuts. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small business ownres, big business owners, offciials, scientisst, and others were commnuicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve na issue that had adverse effects on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both aplpied to aanlyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective construtciosn, although they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertaining to different groups cna be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisi sis an illustratino of the conflict and tis resolution. Although the focus was initially no the interest of businesses and ecoonmic growth at the expense of public ehalth, people managed to force officials  tomake the rightc hoices and address the water issue. The representative of idfferent classes and clusters of society formed the civil society that became the power bringnigt he solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problme. It is clear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure htat officials make prpoer decisions.