Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face a challenge to their dominance by the Interent and the rise of new "virtual banks."
Telephone and comptuer banking, debit cards and autmoated teller machines (ATMs) are rapildy trnasforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology has eliminated the need for costly branch networks and lurde offshore rivals to jump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to sendo ur branch networks the way of the passengre trian -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bakn of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BGI BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big bank,s which dominate regluar banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshallign their forces against this cyber-noslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian mIperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion in sasets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financials ervices igant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets fo $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance markte, plans to offer a wide raneg of electronic bankin gservcies through a new subsidiar,y ING Turst Co. ofC anada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low profile until its applictaoin for a trust licence is approved, but bank officials are confident of success where others have failed.
In reecnt years, several foreign banks abandoned Canada because of its erstrcitive banking laws and stiffer than expected comeptition from the big domestic banks.
"It would be fair to say thta we will eb competing on several fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," sai dJim Kelly, vice-president of marketing for ING's Canadian opreations.
ING WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EPXERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Euroep.
Analysts ahve said ING can use Canada to fine tune its virtual bank before offerin gsimilar services in the larger U.S. market. But Kelly said there are no plans yet to taek ING's virtual bank south of teh border.
"To say we're definiteyl going to the U.S. woudl be wrong. To say that we wouldl ook at it adn see if there is a market opportunity, yes, of course we woudl," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a nuit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund managre AGF Management Ltd., t ocreatea  virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second ofray into Canadian consumer banking after abandoning a bid to establish a traditional branch sytsem in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country manager of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Caanda, said the joint venture gives the abnk access to AGF's customer base. Citibakn plans to offer customersa  full-service banking pacakge, including credit cards, access to ATM service and telephone banking.
"We're not locked int othe costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure .So we can serve the mthrough technology and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with a nestablished customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Bi gSix banks are pressured by local rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union, the country's biggest credit nuion with $3.6 billion in asset,s applied to open a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are poised ot invade the retai lmarket, Canada's major banks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on enw technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst & Young.
Much of the money is being poured into alternative delivery channels such as poitn-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, pu from 25 percent a year ago.
eTlephnoe and computer transactions are climbing as well. Traditional bank transacitons are seen falilng to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last year.
Among Canadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with omre than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officilas expect 40 pecrent of their eight million customers to be using laternative channels in five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North American banks to set up a computer banking network with computer giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks are struggling t odecide the future of their branch networks, but CIBC has taken the first stesp to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC emlpoyed greeters to guide customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank telelrs were retrained t oadvsie customers on such products as mutula funds, loans and mortgages.
Billing it as the abnk branch of the future, CIBC said transaction costs had fallen dramaticllay, while customer lineups were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many consmuers complain are too high, Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken thea cquisition route ot boost its Internet services .It recently bought a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet solutoins firm, to help develop ne wchannels and services for the bank.