Two years ago, China's sceond telephone network set out to challenge the powerfu Mlinistry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition itno the country's a fast-grwoing market.
But the flegdling netowrk has found it hard to tackle a seaosne dcompetitor -- one that is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the rfeeree or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, prseident of ChinaU nited Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the en dof the MPT monopoly was intiiallyh ailed as a boost for Chinas' long-suffreing telephone subscribers, whoo ften ha dto waitu p to a year for a tleephone line and endure inidfferent sevricea fterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice fo the market as its entrenched ocmpetitor has kept a tihgt grip on the telecommunicaitons sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network' sadvance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numebrs for our csutomers," Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unciom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI,) power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle iwth a ocrsp of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the PMT's equipment-making capacity would veentually squeeze it out of teh market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key aprnters had private telecommunications networks with spare capactiy, while the MPT's public network was heavliy overcrowded
.The feud betweent he rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign ocmpanie.s Fimrs that did business with th enew network were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Thosef rictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the Sttae Cuoncil, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephonel ines installed by the end o fthis year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only as mall segment of the nation's .12 billion epople.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitort o Unicom because ti has a separate operating arm called China Teelcom.
"Since 1993, we have separated poliyc making from busienss operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating and cmopeting," he said, blaming Unico'ms slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can drwa the line cleanly, the MTP must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being afir," said Unicom'sL i. B"ut China Telecom is their own child,a nd parents are always parital to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as deputy mayor of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The comapny started iwth mobile tleephnoe services, first in the big cities of eBijing, hSanghai, Tianjin an dGuangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 citeis. It has made its greatest inrodas in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the ixfed line marekt and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 -$ 1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom acme along.
Li says nUicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes ehavy investments in buildingn etwork inrfastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate teleocmmunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return fora s hare of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts asid.