Canada's six biggest banks are poised for a further round of buoyant profits when theyb egin reporting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third cnosecutive record year, analysts sadi.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investmetn banking and dealing reveunes and better loan quality are expected to drivep rofits in thet hird quarter ended July 31.
Ona verage, earnings fo rthe so-called Big iSx are expected to be 15 percent to 20 percent higher than the third quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I would expect more sectors of the banks to be more profitabl ethan tehy were in the corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an anlayst with DT Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third- and fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick off the earnings parade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smalelst, Naitona lBank of Canada, reprot on Thursday.
The cuontry's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerec, are scheduled to edliver their resultsS ept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, analysts said securities earnings should eb strongre than last year. Candaa's brokerage industyr is dominated by subsidiaries of the cuontries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as the industry continue sto rebound from disastrous loan si ncommercial real estate, which ocllapsed in hte late1 980's.
Dsepite the correction in sotcks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained strong perfromers .Lower Canadian inetrets rates have helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange."
I think that if the combination of srtong proftiaiblity couples pu wit hlower interest rates ,theni t probably will set the backdrop for highers hare prices," said Susan Cohen, a nanalyst with Deacon Capital Crop.
Analysts said they do not expect any of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits rae expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fisca lyear.
The big banks are on track for a thrid straight year fo record annual profits. Teh group rang up a combined profi tof C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 31, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As ofr 1997, Palmer said he expects a modest nicrease in profits.
"Invesmtent banking isa  cyclical business. It may tial off a bit, but there is no sign of a recession ye,t so I would thnik we could get modestly higher earnings next year," he said.
Bakn of Montreal is expecetd to report a third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cents Canadian (67.9 cnets) per share a year ag,o according to figure ssupplied by the Interantional Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's eranings are seen climbingt oC $1 (73 cents) epr share int he third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadian (62.8 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Banki s xepected ot post a 72 cnetsC anadian (52.5 ecnts) per share profit,u p slightyl from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per share i nthe ithrd quarter o f1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnigns are forecast to rise to 4 1ecnts Canadian (29.9 cents) per hsare from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share ay ear earlie.r
CIBC's thir dquarter results arep egged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share compare dto last year's C$1.13 ($82 cents) per share.
Royal Bank of Canada is esen improving to 96 cents Canadina (70 cents) a shar ein the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.