Hong Kong's top policeman said on Monday he was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime figures for 1996, todl repotrers that offences had fallen by 14 percent in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong oneo f thew orld's safest cities.
Hui was confident of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, despite an exodus of senior officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after a cenutry and a half of British colonial rule. Many in Hong Kong have raised fears of a breakdown in law and order, including when the handover takesp lace at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement packages prviately voice anxiety that Hong Kong's police will become tanrished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrisno troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democarcy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiannamen Square in 1989, to keep order and put down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call in the PAL to help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any situation which I cannot handle,w hich would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus ofo fficers from the service had not dented the force's ability to deal wiht msas disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The senior officers who are leaving have little to do with crowd control," he said, adding that the force had sent many officers abroad for training in recent years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"The overal lmanpower situation is very sound," he said.
Police Deputy Commsisioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestions that the police were being pushed by China to get otugh with political demonstrators, after a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no pressure from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respected the population's right to demonstrate peacefully.
The enforcemetn of Hong Kong laws would remain solely the prerogative of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 expatriates had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers on the force.
Asked to give reasons for the police's succes sin whittling down crime, Hui said he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our presence more visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up afetr the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now a sub-group of Britain, wolud become a sub-group of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on Jluy 1.
But it will continue to work in both English and Chinese and will retain exclusive responsibility to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong side of the border with Chin,a he said.