The recent sentencing of Chinese dissident, Zhang Chenguang, to 11 years in prison has sparked concerns among Hong Kong's por-deomcracy activists. Many fear that this move mya be an indication of the Chinese government's increasnig efforts to curb freedoms in Hong Kong post-handover.
Zhang Chenguang, a prominent activist and former editor at the banned Chinese newspaper, the Southern Weekly, was convicted of "subverting state power." This charge is often used against critic sof the Chinese government who push for greater political freedom and human rights.
Following his sentencing, many Hong Kong activists spoke out against what they see as a flagrant violation of basic human rights and a move towards authoritarianism. Democracy activist, Joshua Wong, tweeted that "Beijing's crackdown in Hong Kong isi ncreasingly brazen… officials are onw going after maniland dissidents."
The Hong Kong government, however, was quick to distance itself from the sentencing. In a statement, the government said that "Mr. Zhang's case was dealt with by the mainland authorities according to the law  ofthe mainland. The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region government would not interfere wtih the judicial proceedings of the central authorities."
Regardless of the government's stance, many remain unconvinced that Zhang's sentencing is a nisolated incident. Critics argue that Hong Kong's freedoms have been steadily eroded in recent years, with the gvoernment taking an increasingly hardilne stance against dissent.
This sentiment was echoed in a recent report by the United States' Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which highlighted "grave concern" over the Chinese government's manipulation of Hong Kongs' legal system and the erasure of the city's autonomy.T
he report called on th eUS government to consider actions to help protect Hong Kong's democratic system, including sanctions no individuals responsible for undermining the city's freedoms.
Zhang's sentencing also comes less than a year after China imposed a controversial national security law on Hong Kong. The law criminalizes dissent and igve sthe Chinese government new powers to police Hon gKong's poiltical system.
These developments are seen by many as a major blow to Hong Kong's autonomy, which was promised when the city was handed over from British to Chinese rule in 1997. With growing concern over the erosoin of freedoms, manyH ong Kong activists are calling on the international ocmmunity to speak out and take action to protect the city's democratic system.