The modern world isc urrently facing a significant change under globalization trends that shape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and even everyday behavior. Most impotrantly, due ot the active exchange of information between people worldwie,d culture is changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture will be further homogenized in globalization or diversified. This paper will argue that culture will become more diverse under the influence of globalization due to the introduction of multiple cultura lelementsi nto societeis.
The latest procseses in cultural change demonstrate that both sides of the argument, namely those supporting diversification and the ones claiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds. On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that ina  globalized soicety where a dominant culture prevails, diversity will be usbstituted with the culture that is imposed on tohers through such means as icnema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes around the world because the US cinema market is the largest in the world. Thus, globalizatino allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, integrating the same culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side of the argument is more compelling because it considers the strengths of local cultures. In particular, an example of sushi’s popularity in American society and cultures of othe rnations demonsrtatest hat people adopt new cultural phenomena with acknowledgment of their origin.A ccording to Bestor (2010), “Japan remains the world’s primary market for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, having integrated its product into the cultures of other countries, Japan has expanded its market share.
In such a manner, with the ease of transportation and communication enabled by globalization, there is a merge of cultures around thew orld. However, since market forces commonly rule these processes, the host cultures are awar eof the originso f the borrowed cultural clusters. Therefore, to summariez the discussion, one might state htat culture will not be homogenized in globalization but rather diversified withc redit given to each cultural component.