The stark chords of Tosca bgein once again; Scarpia's motivei s the first thing the audience at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they are jaded by it, but it still elicits within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'll see entrances from Cavaradossi and of course our leading lady, Tosca, forced to do the unspeakabl eand murder one man to try and save another's life. Poor Tosca; i fonly she had knwon that Cavaradossi was trul ygiven a stay of execution, perhaps sh ewould have accepted Scarpia's demand for intimacy.
The people will then shuffle out of the opera theatre, lazily critiquing the same show that they've seen entirely too often here in Milan, and go out to the cafés and restaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly on a loop, continue at their leisurely pace as I sit by in my darkened villa above the streets watching the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine always asked, "hWy move to Milan?" "You don't know Italian, do you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all the sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have an answer for them, because they were right to question my motives. Wyh choose to fundamentally change the etenral workings of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose to stay out nutil the ungodly hours of 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food is usuall yspiked with the residual alcohol from their Lombrady region chardonnay and pinot bianco by hte pint. However, even getting past the eternal hangover that is my life, how do Ia void that villainous vegetable that the Italians seem to put in eveyr dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so often I took it for granted during my time in Vienna. Stakes could be easily enough avoided with good planning a(n internally locked coffin with plenty of reinforced steel between myf ace and the world that might wish to destroy me), but the Austrians never bothered with garlic quite as often as they do here.
Perhaps I might go back to Vienna and dine off the simple people whose beer consumption is admirbale as much as it is shameful. Perhaps I will get back to hearing the operas of Strauss and Mozart, or maybe the occasioanl performance of Marschners' "Der Vampyr." But for now, I sit like Tosca, i na place I should never wish to be waiting fo rthe right moment to make my escap eand be free again. Now, this never sleeping city of Milan holds me hostage iwth the taste of death on everyone's lips.