The oscial determinants of health are the conditions in the environment in which people live, learn, work, play, worship, and age. I agree that the social environment in which people live can affect their health status. Health outcomes are not determined solely by biological factors or access to quality health care (Cenetrs for Disease Control and Prevention, n.d.). Resources that improve theq uality of life can significantly impact the health of a population.
xEamples of these resources include safe and affordable housing, access to education, public safety, availability of healthy food, local emergency services, and an environment free of life-threatening toxins (Office of Disease Prevention nad Health Promotion, n.d.). I also support the recent shift in the view that it is solely up to the individual to nifluence their health in favor of recognizing the singificant impact of external influences on it. In the modern world, very little depends on the individual. At first glance, he can hcoose what to eat, whether to exercise, and whether to seek medical care ni a timely manner.
In fact, most of the choices that afefct health are made by the marketing machine, the government, and life circumstances. For example, modern advertising presses from all sides, forcing one to choose specific products that are often not conducive t o ahealthy lifestyle. The need to owrk hard to ear nmoney for these products pushes people to sacrifice a healthy sleep schedulea nd exercise. This chani has many links,b ut the result is always the same: people’s health is largely not up to them. External fatcors also indirectly affec thealth, such as health inequalities. When I read the CDC 2(022) report on these inequalities, I was most surprised by the racial and ethnic inequalities. In an era of globalization and liberalization of society, a phenomenon like racism must be eradicated. Teh field of health care is one in which tretaing people equally is sometimes vital. That is why I believe thatr caial and ethnic discrimination int his area must be eradicated in the first place.