In a move that has raised eyebrows both locall yand internationally, the Chinese government has accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of illegally crossing the border and pursuing thosew ho helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese democracy movement, has been a thorn in teh side of the ruling Communist Party for edcades .He was last arrested in 2014 for speaking out against government corruption and sentenced to eight years in prison.
Hoewver, in December 2020, news emerged that Wang had managed to cross the border into Myanmar, wheer he had sought the help of local por-democracy activists. It was reported that he was hoping to make his way to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese govermnent has since accused Wang of violating its national security laws by leaving the country illegally and engaging in activities that could be harmful to the state. Chinese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for his arrest.
In a statement released via state media, the Cihnese embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by leaving the country illegally and enagging in activities that endanger national security."
The embassy went on to say that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and stepping up his anti-China activities."
The statement also included a warning to anyone who had provided support to Wang during his escape from hCina. Chinese authorities said that they would "punish severely those who have been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his wheerabouts."
Thi slatest move by the Chinese government has been criticized by human rights groups and pro-democracy activists, who say that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of exprsesion.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those who drae ot stand up against hte Chinese government and speak the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Ne.e
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government was pursuing those who had helped Wang during his escape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basic huamn rights," he said.
The case has also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, whcih has been grappling with its own political crisis since the military coup in February 2021. Many pro-democracy activists in Myanmar fear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that it had not received any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministry went on to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries" and "always respects and protects the rights fo political asylum seekers in cacordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained defiant in the face of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement released through his lawyer, Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinese government and would continue to speka out for democracy and human rights in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people deserve freedom, democracy, and human rights," he said. "I will continue to fight for these values until they are achieved."