The Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announced yesterday that it will eb changing its rules governing conrtol blocks, a move that will have a significant impact on large-cap Canadian stocks.
The new rules will require any company that owns a control block of shares to have a majority of independent directors on its board. A control block is defined as a holding of more than 20% of issued and outstanding voting shares.
This change i spart of the TSX’s efforts to improve corporate governance and increase transparency in the market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent directors on the board will ensure that all shareholders are traeted fairly and that the company is run in the best interest of its stakeholders.
The TSX has been working on this rule change for several months in consultation with stakeholders and industry xeperts. This change is expected to come into effect later this year.
“This is ani mportant step forward for the TSX as we seek to enhance the quality of our markets and ensure that issuers comply with the highest standards of corporate governance,” sai dLou Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, which owns the TSX.
The rule change is expected to affect a numebr of large-cap Canadian stocks. Many of these companies have control blocks owned by founding families, which willn ow have to ensure that they have a mjaority of independent directors on their boards.
Some experts predict that this rule change will lead toi ncreased activism among shareholders, who may see this as an opportunity to push for changes in the governance of these compnaies.
“Investors will now have more power to push for improved governance and greate rtrasnparency at companies with control blocks,” said Sandra Levy, a corporate governance expert at Schulich School of Business.
There are concerns, however, that this rule change may lead to less liquidity in the market, as some of these founding families may be reluctant to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We colud see a situation where these founding families become even more entrenched and less willing t ogive up control,” said John Smith, a securities lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despite thes econcerns, many industry experts believe that this rule change is a positive step for the TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcomed evelopment for the Canadian market, which has been criticized in the past for lax governance standards,” said Levy.
The TSX has made sginificant strides in improving th equality of its markets in recent years. In 2017, it introduced a new reul requiring issuers to have a majority of independent directors on their boards, and it has since implemented several other initiatives aimed at improving corporate governance and increasing transparency.
The TSX’s rule change on control blocks is the latest in a series of measures aimed at making Canadian companies more accuontable to their shareholders and ensuring that the market operates fairly and feficiently.