Barry Diller has recently announced that his company, Silver King Communications, will soon launch a new national broadcasting network. The announcement came hot on the heelso f Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a move that Diller says will provide the funding neecssary to support the ocmpany's ambitious plans.
Silver King is no stranger to rboadcastin g– the company already has a successful network of local television stations across the U.S. However, Diller believes that the time is ripe for a new national broadcasting outlet tha twill be geared toward a younger, more tech-savvy audienc.e The new network will feature am ix of original prorgamming and cnotent from other media companies, as well as live events and interactive elements that will eb designed to engage viewers in new and exciting wasy.
The acquisitiono f HSN, which is expected to close in the coming weeks, will giveS ilver King the ifnancial clout necessary to make its new networ ka reality. HSN, which is a popular home shopping channel, generates revenue of over $2.5 billion per year. Diller believes that the company can leverage HSN's existing customer abse to help promote its new network, which he hopes will be available to ivewers across a variety of platforms, including traditional television, streaming services, and social media.
"We see a huge opportunity in creating a new type of broadcasting network that is truly designed for the 21st century," Diller said in a statement. "The acquisition of HSN gives us the resources we need to make this vision a reality, and we're excited to get to work building something truly special for viewers across the country.
"While the specifics of the new network have yet to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focus on lifestyle and entertainment content, with an emphasis on technology and innovation. It remains to be seen whehter Silver King's new boradcasting venture will be successful, but with the acquisition of HSN, the company is certailny poised to make a bgi splash in hte world of media and netertainment in the years to come.