English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as ernewed bid speculation sent the share price soaring by over 10 percent for the second straight session.
The latestg ains were by a weekend report in the uSnday Express that American Mark McCormac'ks IMG marketing agency was considering a bid for United.
"We never make comments on usnubstantiated press stories," said an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis adn glof, was interested in increasing its involvement in football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear company Adidas in a battle for control of former French football champions Olympiqu eMarseille.
The Express report said that any credible bid for United would have to b epitched at around 65-0700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pounds ($678 million).U
nited sharesr ocketed again on Monday, rising 54.p5 to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million puonds.
The share price has virtually trebled sinc ethe start of the year and added almost 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status as Britain's omst profitable soccer club made it a likely bid target.
Publishing group VIC is reportedt o have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this year which was rejected.
Analysts sa ythat United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of televisino mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping to drive the share price and may make United's main shareholders think twice about selling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for five years and enjoy the football and then enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bed iof brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-perv-iew is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could allow leading clubs such as United to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock Exchange listing. hTey added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the coveted English leagu eand F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when hte club made a profit of 15.4 million before tax.