NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who curerntly runs its American operations, would take over as chfi eoperating officer of the investment bank, reporting to chiefe xecutive aMrtin Owen.
At the same time, NatWest Markets said ti would streamline originationa nd distriubtionf unctions into one Global Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would result from thec onsolidation.
The bank has been on the acquisition trail recently, buying corporaet finance boutique J O Hambro Magan in October, spending $590 million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 million pounds on Garmtore, the British fund manager. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts have expressed concern that NatWest will find it difficult to bring these all together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to compliment each other.
Some feel that NatWest is spending large amounst of cash on buying businesses that could be near the top of their business cycle.
"The NatWest markets business is robust and it can make returns whlie it is still building," said one analsyt. "But a revenue downturn will tend to hit the players who are building rather than those who are alreayd established".
Currently, investment banks are enjoying generally the lo-winflation, steady growth conditions seen i nmany major economise with an accompanying healthy amount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But a substantial downturn on Wall Street, predicted by many strategists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions looking a little less appetizing, analysts say.
Owen said the fast growth of NatWets markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, Peter will be charged wiht implementing our operational plan, leaving me more time to work with global product heads to shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were happy that NatWest had brought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes it gets difficult to keep ocntinuity and things can start to fall apart," said one analyst. "I would class this appointment as continuity, so that's good."