Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, said Friday its planned initial public offering in June could be worth as much as 12 billion pounds ($20 billion). It will be the largest extension of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK, according to the chief executive of the society. The mutually-owned Halifax, with assets of over 100 billion pounds ($167.8 million), said flotation adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimated a share price of between 390 and 450 pence ($6.54 to $7.55) per share if the IPO had taken place on Dec. 16. This equals a market worth of between 10.4 billion ($17.5 billion) and 12 billion pounds ($20.1 billion), and analysts expect the final outcome to be at the top end of this range given the recent positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market, former mortgage banker Abbey National Plc. "The valuation of 12 billion (pounds) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett. Friday's figures looked conservative, but other analysts think the price will go up. A basic allocation of 200 shares will be given to each of the qualified members. There are over 6 million investing members and over 2 million borrowing members. Of these, there is an overlap 700,000, which means that the Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs. Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending on how much money they had in their accounts on particular dates. The maximum number of shares will be between 200 and 1,181 for those with more than 50,000 pounds. If less than half of the investing members vote in favor of the proposal, it will fail. A huge advertising campaign has been started by the society. Abbey's position as Britain's fifth-largest publicly-owned bank is likely to be threatened by the fact that the Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market value. It said it sees room for huge expansion in the British insurance and long-term savings sectors.