A house is more than just a place to live. A home is a place where one feels more comfortable and looks forward to living through every day. A house is constructed not with stones or timbers but with the link of family. A person may own every materialistic property on the earth, but it would be not very sensible if he did not have someone with whom to exchange it. In other terms, expressing pleasure is also linguistically tied to home. Additionally, home is more than a physical location; it is a state of mind. They share a sense of joy and pleasure with their family members. A home is when one knows they are surrounded by people who can make them feel good in the same second. Home signifies that no matter what one is experiencing or how difficult life becomes, there will always be someone watching out for them. When a person is secure enough to provide an honest account of themselves, they know they will be accepted definitively. For myself, I can single out a few places where I feel at home. This work was written with the aim of explaining one’s own concept of home and a place where a person feels at home. Home is made up of memories that helped shape and teach me. As a result, my house is also people, and when home takes on a human figure, it is referred to as a family. I feel that family is a relative concept that is determined by connections rather than blood (Hess). No matter where I go in the future, this atmosphere and these individuals who have shaped me as a human and shown me how to behave will always be a strong foundation for me. I know I can always return home. Indeed, the spirit is where the household is. Since college is where people spend most of their day, I feel at ease. My classmates, whom I have known for many years, are also at the same school. A friend of mine in the same class is like a sibling to me. We communicate a lot, and he knows all of my secrets. He is my best friend and I have known him for years. All of my professors are familiar to me, and they are all delightful to me. They also instruct me and assist me with any problems I may have. I can say what home for me is in this way. In this essay, like a home, I show my family and the college where I study. For me, the feeling of home is the place where I can return at any time, and if not all, then one person can definitely help me. I single out communication as a factor that contributes to a sense of calm and security in my home. The place where you studied for a long time and communicated with people who became close to you is the house. Feeling at home is an essential feeling for every person because it gives people support and faith in themselves and their loved ones.