NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but other questions over the bank's strategy remained, analysts said. NatWest said Hall, who currently runs its American operations, would take over as chief operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to chief executive Martin Owen. At the same time, NatWest Markets said it would streamline origination and distribution functions into one Global Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions. NatWest said no job losses would result from the consolidation. The bank has been on the acquisition trail recently, buying corporate finance boutique J O Hambro Magan in October for $590 million. It also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million. But analysts have expressed concern that NatWest will find it difficult to bring these all together, despite the fact that the businesses seem to compliment each other. NatWest is spending a lot of cash on businesses that could be near the top of their business cycle. One analyst said that the NatWest markets business can make money. Revenue downturns will hit players who are building rather than those who are already established. Currently, investment banks are enjoying generally the low-inflation, steady growth conditions seen in many major economies with an accompanying healthy amount of mergers and acquisitions activity. But a substantial downturn on Wall Street, predicted by many strategists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions looking a little less appetizing, analysts say. Owen said the fast growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led him to the conclusion that the day-to-day operational management should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision. Owen said that Peter will be given more time to work with global product heads because he will be charged with implementing the operational plan. Analysts were happy that NatWest brought in an experienced person to the job. "Sometimes it gets difficult to keep continuity and things can start to fall apart," said one analyst. I would class this appointment as continuity.