Lear Corp., furthering its quest to supply complete car interiors, said Friday it agreed to buy the instrument panel and trim parts unit of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB. The deal was signed for undisclosed terms. Based in Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, exterior trim and various other components for the European car and truck industry. Borealis Industrier had sales of about $230 million in 1995 and has five plants in Sweden. Primary customers for the business include Swedish carmakers AB Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB. Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and energy group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS. Completion of the transaction is subject to approval by the Swedish competition authority and other conditions. The acquisition supports the strategy of having in-house capability to provide total automotive interior systems, including instrument panels. "Not only does this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier in the world with in-house capabilities in all five interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in a statement. The deal is the latest of a series of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. The company bought carpet and floor-mat maker Masland for $384 million. Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a wide range of automotive interior components. The company's stock was not traded on the New York Stock Exchange. Competitors are pursuing the same acquisition strategy. The interior parts maker Prince automotive, based in Holland Mich., was acquired by Johnson Controls for over $1 billion in cash. One of the "Big Three" automotive interior firms, along with Johnson Controls and Lear, recently acquired a seat maker for $135 million.