In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victims of violent crimes are natural allies. The prosecutors strive to bring the offenders to justice, whether to fulfill their duty before the law or achieve career progress. At the same time, the victims get moral satisfaction when the criminals are brought to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victims are naturally supposed to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes the victims can't cooperate with the prosecutors because of the shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor's office. The first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) were funded by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration in order to improve cooperation between the prosecutors' offices and victims. The VWAPs have become established institutions that support crime victims. Prosecutor offices can help the victims of violent crimes. The best practices include psychological help in hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). In addition, most VWAPs make referrals to local agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Legal assistance is offered by prosecutor offices through pamphlets. VWAPs inform the victims about indictments, postponements, acquittals, convictions, and other possible developments in the case. As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equipped for ensuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and even financial support. The San Diego County District Attorney’s Office serves as a specific example of a well-rounded victim services project. Emergency, legal, and psychological help are offered by the Victim Assistance Program. The San Diego County District Attorney's office funds the Victim Compensation Board, which reimburses victims of violent crimes. These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, home security improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, crime victims in the County of San Diego can rely on decent support from their District Attorney’s office.