Many people suffer from mental disorders such as manias, phobias, and panic attacks. An obsessive-compulsive disorder, or OCD, is a long-term mental illness that can be difficult to control. The analysis of this disorder due to the four D diagnostic indicators can let us explore it more profoundly and thoroughly. * Distress: OCD often makes individuals feel abnormal when they are forced to fight the terrible thoughts torturing their heads and repeat meaningless acts intended to decrease anxiety. In addition, having “unwanted, recurrent and persistent images or impulses that evoke anxiety or extreme distress” and realizing “the unreasonable nature of symptoms” people cannot stop them (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 1-2). They become nervous and depressed: therefore, the level of distress is high and complicates the person’s life. The daily life of a patient is influenced by this disorder. A surge of panic can be caused by obsessive thoughts, as they interfere with the usual people's acts. Sometimes, “cognitive biases cause dysfunctional beliefs” (Van Leeuwen et al., 2020, p. 2). Secondly, compulsive actions interrupt a patient’s daily routine, forcing them to do specific steps a certain number of times. Such activities can last even for an hour or more: therefore, the extent of dysfunction is also noticeable. * Danger: OCD may represent a significant danger for an individual since sometimes, people feel so depressed that they are ready to commit suicide. If they can get rid of their obsessive thoughts, they can strike themselves to get rid of the unwanted image. However, although one of the most widespread fears of people with OCD is to harm others, they rarely do it (O’Connor & Aude, 2019). The danger to self is higher than the danger to others. People with obsessive-compulsive disorder can be characterized as deviant. However, it would be wrong to claim that it is easy to “determine the degree of deviation from the norm” (Davis, 2009, p. 1). Obsessive Compulsive Disorder makes people live in fear that they will not be able to avoid danger if they don't do specific actions. Therefore, an individual should visit a clinic and let specialists help them fight.