Strong demand for its Windows 95 and Windows NT computer operating systems helped fuel record sales as Microsoft reported better-than- expected profits for the latest quarter. In its fiscal first quarter ended in September, the world's largest software maker said it earned a record $614 million, or 95 cents a share. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion. The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rose to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier close of $134 on Nasdaq. Microsoft cited strong acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operating system. Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, Sales and Marketing, said that they shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter. "Corporate customers made the decision to adopt Windows NT servers and workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada. The rate at which Windows NT server sales grew was nearly double that of other operating system environments. Microsoft's results were considered a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system. Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales and earnings growth would slow from last year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but noted it should continue to benefit from higher sales of personal computers and the growing use of Windows 95 and Windows NT. Mike Brown said he expected Microsoft's revenues to go up over the next two quarters. In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company's cost of goods sold could decline "a little bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of revenues just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago. "We will grow a little bit in December and then a little bit more in March," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and I was very pleased with the pattern of costs in the quarter." The December quarter would be driven by holiday season sales, while the next quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one of its core products.