Hong Kong's top police_officer pronounce on Monday helium was confident the territory's police could handle any disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.
Police Commissioner Eddie Hui, unveiling crime human_body for 1996, told reporter that crime had fallen by 14 percentage in the year, reaching a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the world's safest cities.
Hui was confident of tackling any crime problem, including mass disturbances, contempt an exodus of aged officers, mainly expatriates, from the Royal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July 1 this year after vitamin_A century and a half of British colonial rule. Many indium Hong Kong have raised fears of a disruption in police and order, admit when the handover takes place at midnight on June 30.
Officers taking early retirement software in_private voice anxiousness that Hong Kong's police will go tarnished by China-style corruption after the handover.
Pro-democracy politicians have warned that China could impose repressive laws and use its PLA garrison troops, whose colleagues crushed pro-democracy presentation in Beijing's Tiananmen Square indium 1989, to keep order and set down protests.
Asked by Reuters if the police might call indium the PLA to help deal with disturbances after the handover, Hui said: "I hope not. I can't foresee any situation which I cannot handle, which would require the assistance of the People's Liberation Army."
He said the exodus of officers from the service induce not dented the force's ability to deal with batch disturbances in this freewheeling city of 6.3 million people.
"The aged officers who are leaving have fiddling to do with crowd control," he said, total that the force had sent many officers abroad for educate in Holocene_epoch years and was prepared to deal with any outbreak of unrest.
"The overall work_force situation is very sound," he said.
Police deputy commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong, dismissed suggestion that the police were represent crusade by China to get tough with political demonstrators, after a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups hostile to China.
"We're under no imperativeness from anybody in dealing with demonstrations," Wong said, adding that the Hong Kong police respect the population's right to show peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws would stay solely the privilege of the Hong Kong Police, he said.
Hui said 155 exile had asked to retire in the run-up to the handover, representing just five percent of the total of 3,000 senior officers along the force.
Asked to give reason for the police's success in whittling down crime, Hui pronounce he had sent more police out on the beat.
"We have moved a batch of our officers to the front line, to the streets, to make our bearing More visible," he said.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contributed to a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often induce mainland links.
He said cooperation with Chinese police would be stepped up subsequently the handover when Hong Kong's Interpol office, now vitamin_A sub-group of Britain, would go a sub-group of China.
The force is to drop the word "royal" from its name and abandon the British insignia on July 1.
But it bequeath continue to work in both English and Chinese and will continue exclusive duty to maintain law and order and police the Hong Kong slope of the border with China, he said.