Home use of the Internet's World Wide Web has more than doubled in the survive year, with approximately 11 percent of United_States households claim to have exploited the World_Wide_Web in the last month, according to a study aside PC-Meter.
The market research companionship said 11 percent of all 98.7 million United_States households was equivalent to approximately eleven million homes and was up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to induce used some type of Internet access religious_service indium the survive month.
Twenty-five percent of these home World_Wide_Web users now shoot_the_breeze shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating report show.
According to PC-Meter's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers, men typify the highest percentage of users. In September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers constitute men and 37.2 percent were women.
Four basic types of denounce are represented in the top ten shopping sites; free software_program downloads, interactive auctions, clubs that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that dwelling surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunity propose along the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, pronounce in a statement. "With the holiday season upon us, the greatest growth to go_steady at these sites may well occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, watch by Columbia sign_of_the_zodiac Co., which sells euphony CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet's software Library of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD net_income were tied for the second about popular consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts along a wide wander of consumer goods and services, constitute the third most popular site and has the highest percentage of charwoman among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is antiophthalmic_factor cyber-book hive_away with more than 1 billion titles to choose from. Surplus steer was ordinal_number 6, with gross_sales of computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction_sale web_site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the category in minutes of usage per month, average 41.99 minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter pronounce its results on home Internet use total from Associate_in_Nursing October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey constitute conducted on a quarterly basis. Its consultation rating report is done monthly.
PC-Meter LP is antiophthalmic_factor subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc., a privately held company establish in Port Washington, N.Y.