Regulators took the first of two steps Tuesday to slash the cost of abroad phone calls for consumers and businesses, making it easier for United_States and foreign mailman to negotiate brassy external rates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to salvage U.S. callers million of dollars by backing up the new rules with vitamin_A separate proposal to be unveiled next month to cut the charges United_States carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to arrant calls from the United States.
Americans spend about 16 cents a minute for a domestic call. But they must beat out an fair of 99 cents a minute to call overseas -- even though the cost of the calls are not a_lot different, according to Federal_Communications_Commission officials.
"At ninety-nine cents a minute, you're not going to get a global information highway," complained Federal_Communications_Commission Chairman Reed Hundt.
Tuesday's rules are targeted at countries whose have call markets are open to competition from U.S. carriers, or are in the cognitive_process of opening. FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan announced Tuesday, the Federal_Communications_Commission will waive convention that limit the ability of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling rates with an overseas phone company whose own market is considered open. The convention were crafted to prevent market abuse by foreign monopolies.
Don Gips, head of the FCC's International Bureau, said the new rules "will allow competitive pressures, rather than antediluvian rules," to govern the telecommunications market.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerry Salemme pronounce they "can lead to a significant reduction In the amount that American consumers pay for international call calls."
Under the new approach, a company such as AT&T -- with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the right to traverse AT&T phone traffic from the United States to a foreign market.
Alternatively, vitamin_A United_States carrier could offer end-to-end service from the United States to a foreign market without using the existing rate system for completing calls.
Officials say these "accounting rates" run five to 10 times actual costs, reflecting the power of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. U.S. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $5.5 million more in 1995 than strange company paid U.S. mailman to complete calls.
While the accounting_system rates paid by both carriers constitute about equal, the imbalance reflects the fact that many More overseas calls are make from the United States than into this country.
International calls from the United States account for approximately a quarter of all international shout worldwide.
To reduce the rates, the FCC proposal scheduled for adjacent month would dress "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay strange carriers to complete calls. These rates, according to FCC officials, would better chew_over actual costs.
The agency must still work forbidden the details of how farseeing a country would have to lower information_technology rates and what steps could be taken if it refuse to do so.
The FCC actions come as the connect States is try to open abroad telecommunication grocery_store through talks sponsored by the World Trade Organisation.
The connect States has boastful rank imbalances with China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hong Kong, Columbia and Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal is likely to ruffle feathers.
"There will be concern from countries approximately the world with the benchmark item. There's no doubt about that," said the FCC's Gips.