It was a warm summer day and I was out for a stroll. I saw them on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, two by two. one didn't pay much care until they passed under the glitter of the gaslamp. Never had I seen such an pair of opposites! For the legal_brief time they walked under it, the light illuminated the pair. The man's build_up and head constitute covered in scars! What I had mistaken for a face_fungus was a mass of scars! His arms and legs were so densely overrun that I induce thought it a coat and trousers! The woman had disgraceful hair, long and straight, as if it were manufactured string by string. But her skin is what shocked me, even bang-up than the man! It had the most exquisite complexion, almost translucent in the light, and one saw nary a flaw on it. I looked to my own marred hands, although compared to that man, it was vitamin_A blessing; as I worried, small cuts shape on my arm. information_technology began to sting as my sweat seeped into my fresh wounds. Not lacking more scars, I shook my negative thoughts and ran to the couple.
"Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but I must inquiry, how is it that your wife is so beautiful, yet you are so…."
The man and woman looked at each other, she turned away, blushing, and he laughed raucously.
"Hideous?" asked the man between laughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my rudeness.
"Don't worry," he said, putting his arm around my shoulder, "I get it all the time."
"My apologies sir, but how, in this world, did your married_woman manage to keep from scarring?"
"Well, you see," helium said with a wink, "she's not my wife, but my daughter."
I was taken aback. "Still….How?"
"Well, she's not entirely flawless. She can't tell a joke and her cooking's lousy! Takes after her get I guess!"
Laughing, he said, "Take a look at her finger."
I peered at the daughter, she offered her properly hand and I saw a thin bright stripe of red on her index finger.
The man pluck me in, "I'm gonna distinguish you a story."
"Long ago, when I was married, I swore ne'er to have kids. I didn't want whatever children to be digest into this world, so that was that. But my wife had other plans, and so my daughter was born. I fell in love with her and affirm to devote my animation to her. As she grew, though, I began to worry. 'How would I protect her from the world?' therefore I set out to every doctor, physician, and scientist I could find, asking for a cure. Of course, if at_that_place was a cure already, no one would be like this."
He cleared his throat, necessitate a deep breath, and continued.
"On one finicky visit to a doctor, I induce my daughter with me and upon exiting the building, I met vitamin_A man dressed all in black.
I immediately thought, 'This must be the devil' and twist heel back into the building.
'Wait,' the man in black said, 'I can save your daughter.'
I was skeptical and scoffed, 'What for my soul?'
He replied, 'I am bored with just bartering with souls, I constitute more interested in it's durability.' The devil continued, giggling, 'You see, I do have the power to stop your daughter's scarring, but I'm not a very charitable person.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I want you to partake in a very simple wager,' helium said, 'Your daughter won't get scars, but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your daughter gets will constitute transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, you keep your soul, if not, well, you know what will happen."'
I constitute dumbstruck that helium necessitate the deal, and that he managed to last this long.
"And so," the world continued, "I agreed and the devil pricked mine and my daughters finger to seal the deal. So she grew up and I took the blows. Puberty was a rough time. child can be so cruel. But that scar on her finger was the survive one she'd ever get, one had sure of that."
I was amazed at this man's love for his daughter and his willpower. How much annoyance did he have to endure? every scar on his body seemed to pulsate vitamin_A I wondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Your deal with the devil?"
He replied with a smile, "Not at all."