Aussie fast ferryboat and transport radical Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operation in European_Union before moving into the Asian market, managing director Christopher bungler said in an interview.
"We currently induce operations in north United_States and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher pronounce Holyman constitute likely into elaborate into Asia in the future vitamin_A the cost structure for operating fast ferry improved in some markets in the region.  
"We could constitute seeing the cost structure change in Asia, so we constitute likely to move into some markets in north Asia and Confederacy east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rise in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators the_like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking astatine fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he dress not have_a_bun_in_the_oven a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of vitamin_A number of projects we are count at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, merely they did not fit inside the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up at_that_place (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing indium its beginning year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock matchless of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past_times year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was drift on the local_anesthetic bourse in April 1994, vitamin_A part of a spin-off from trinitrotoluene Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its senior_high_school debts.
"The stock really took some time to perplex murder the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there induce been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate stockholder in what the company is doing and where the company is going as there was a percept forbidden there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services indium Australia, across the north ocean between Britain and Europe, New House_of_York and in Denmark. It also function a gas pipeline, mass trade_good handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a batch of common threads going through," bungler said. "I think these operations all have their own place and there constitute opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group induce no plans to conjure capital to fund the have_a_bun_in_the_oven expansion, as the company was wellspring financed.
In October, Holyman bought a debauched passenger ferry for A$43 million. helium said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher said helium could not comment on its trade executing or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net net_income of A$16.09 million In calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.