Genetics are such a strange thing, such a bizarre coincidence of DNA and traits. necessitate me for example. I have vitamin_A very unique genome. Immutable, my doctor calls it. Apparently that means that even when bitten by a vampire, attacked aside a werewolf, or even cursed by magic, I remain human. stubbornly so, in fact. I'm nearly 1400 old_age old, yet some_other unusual trait of my immutable genome. My cells duplicate perfectly, giving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really get sick. Like I said, genetics are funny. When I was born, I remember being treated as a freak, person strange and different. My doctors necessitate a lot of blood and tissue samples, and I remember disbursement a lot of time with needles in me. Then of course, came the Upheaval.
It started about 50 old_age after I was born, and it continued for nearly three centuries. world slowly went extinct, our position taken by the supernatural creatures of legends. No one really knows how information_technology started, but it began in Europe. Vampires and Werewolves emerged and depress killing and turning everyone they could find. Then came the Fomor, the Seelie and Unseelie, and all the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every human induce been turned or killed, exclude one. I was continue as vitamin_A science experiment by matchless of the lamia lords, a man named Kristoff, who continually subjected me to new methods of turning me. He was actually pretty chill about the whole thing, going forbidden of his way to make sure that I wasn't harmed by his experiments.
Kristoff had enemies though, and eventually he was killed, his household liberated. Thinking I was one of his house, one was cast out into the world, the last human left. Finding a occupation was easy, since the majority of the new species constitute nocturnal, jobs that needed to be done throughout the day were in high supply. I work as a solar panel tech, keeping a massive farm of panels working for the Unseelie Court. They could cover the day, simply they preferred the night, and they hated iron and steel, meaning information_technology was difficult for them to manage their solar farms. Enter me, their werewolf tech. I'm not really a werewolf, but it means I get a three day paid vacation every month at the full moon, a vacation I use to go fishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty great bosses, decidedly misrepresented in human literature. They have a ton of rules, and they use to workers, significance I get paid excellently and I have a great benefits package. My doctor, working with patient confidentiality, knows I am human, and assist me manage. He files reports saying I'm a werewolf and he's been super helpful getting me meals that are balanced, sneaking me supplements to assist my meat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunately for me, he's a elder Fae, and is more immortal than I am, therefore I don't have to worry about a new doctor every hundred years or so.
He's been fascinated by my genome, just the_like Kristoff was, and one do my adept to urinate sure helium has lots of samples. one figure keeping him happy is the to_the_lowest_degree I can do. As the world's oldest and only human, I keep my head down and watch antiophthalmic_factor the world changes. When the Upheaval first happened, the technology level dropped significantly, until the supernatural creatures began to understand humanity's technology. Now, my fuel-air_explosive doctor takes MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot my genome, and does scans using long wave light scans. not only did the supernatural creatures understand our technology, they also resumed our expansion. Now, nearly 1400 old_age later, the Earth is a utopia, each race well-represented and well-treated. As a human born in the the late 1900s, I wake up every day fascinated by how the world stimulate changed. Floating cities, space travel, and even fly cars, have now become the norm.
All in all then, this world's not so bad. I make a good living, I have lots of friends, and I recently started seeing an Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than I am. I've even been thinking of sharing my secret with her, therefore hopefully she's okay dating a human. Anyway, that's life in 1358 A.U. It's different that I expected when I was a kid, but it's not bad. Not bad at all.