Dear Diary, I know information_technology been a while merely delight forgive me. Earlier today when walk home from educate I had a strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened nowadays and one am totally freaking out. one was crossing squash Creek along the north bridge like I dress everyday after class. But this time when I approached the on ramp I noticed a small wooden stool model in the path. information_technology wasn't until I tried walking around it did one notice the..thing, I don't sleep_together what to call it a troll maybe? Yeah, a troll that makes sense. I met vitamin_A round today. At first I though it was some crude creation of some methamphetamine tweakers made of dead cats and Pisces merely then this harry, scalie thing turned to me and gave me a grin. I constitute therefore taken back that I fell on my ass right there. If not for that I would have been out of there instantly, and the fact that this thing started to talk to me.." Easy there young-en!" it said in a disturbingly human voice "Where be you off to in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I spoke spinal_column to the "troll", I must have been in shock still. "I constitute just test to cross here, I do it almost every day". It was silent for a moment after that therefore replied "You see son, this constitute my bridge now"! "And you traverse it on my terms". He stuck approximately class of crooked cane in my face vitamin_A I started to get up to my feet. "You must answer my riddle" he choked out with a laugh. This was the point where I constitute change one had die perfectly bonkers. I literally pinched myself which only aided in his laughter. "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? helium said in a boring majestic voice. How represent one supposed to know that? It was likely some ancient proverb or great animation lesson I had never heard of..I tried logical_thinking with the thing merely it wouldn't have any. one had to answer it..otherwise I would have to walk four miles to the other crossing. Yeah right. I sat at_that_place for about twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away until I had settled on an answer. it never told me what would happen if one constitute amiss in my reply...I opened my sass to speak "What time is it when an elephant sits on your fence"? I repeated. "Its time to bribe vitamin_A new fence" I said confidently. The trolls face showed no emotion until he suddenly erupted in laughter, helium even fell off his stupid stool. Was I right I thought to myself. I then decided that while he mocks my amiss answer I wasn't going to necessitate any of that. I ran. I ran fast and didn't turn back. Now I'm recording it all. Should I tell my parents? What if it lookout me? Was my answer right? I'm not even sure information_technology actually happened..