The television_receiver and amusement diligence vowed Thursday to use only their system for rating TV programmes and promised to spurn -- by legal means, if necessary -- any government-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a group of television_receiver and Hollywood executives are scheduled next hebdomad to unveil plans for vitamin_A system to rate shows based on their suitability for kids of different ages, especially those under 14 years of age.
It will be exchangeable to the 28-year-old system of letters and numbers used by the motion-picture industry and which includes the ratings G, PG, PG-13, R and NC-17.
"We will non use any other TV rating guidelines other than the ones we are going to announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief executive of the Motion Picture Association of America and head of the "implementation group" developing the ratings.
But parental groups, children's advocates, educators and some key lawmakers -- admit Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have necessitate that the group include a content-based system specifying the level of sex, violence and bad language.
Lawmakers have not ruled out a legislative fix.
"It is clear that the industry has so far failed to answer adequately to the fundamental interest of parents in sleep_together the specific content of TV shows in advance," Markey said at a news conference accompanied by early lawmakers and group pushing for a content-based system the_like the matchless now used aside the HBO cable_television channel.
At a press conference responding to Markey, Valenti lashed back. helium accused Markey of trying to use government as vitamin_A "big brother" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed not to fold nether pressure and alter his group's system.
"We're not going to exchange a Bible of it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recross a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there is any intervention by government, we're going to be in court in a nanosecond."
The Federal_soldier Communications Commission also must approve or reject the tell_on system. If it were to reject it, the agency could call for development of Associate_in_Nursing alternative plan -- matchless that Valenti pronounce the industry would ignore.
Once the denounce are implemented in January, Valenti did say the industry would revisit the system after about a year to determine whether it should be changed or "tweaked."
"Is information_technology perfect? Of course not. wholly subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.
The denounce -- have_a_bun_in_the_oven to include six broad categories -- will not apply to news, intelligence magazine shows such as "60 Minutes" operating_room sports. TV networks and syndicators will return the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age and content, according to Valenti.
Proposed guidelines leak to the media include two for children: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children erstwhile than seven.
The other four are: "TV-G" for general audiences; "TV-PG," parental guidance suggested; "TV-14" for parents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.
The rating are to be used in conjunction with a "V-chip" installed In TV sets that allow parents to block out shows they consider too fierce or racy.
The HBO system, developed in the mid-80s, offers ratings such as "MV" for "mild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and "AL" for "adult language."
But Valenti pronounce that system is unworkable and is too complicated to look in TV listings indium the newspaper.
He also said a 19-member monitor and oversight radical will be created to oversee the new ratings. It will include a chairman and representives from the creative side of the industry, TV broadcasters and the cable-TV industry.