Britain's big mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, said Friday its planned initial populace offering in June could be worth as a_lot as 12 billion British_pound ($20 billion).
Unveiling vitamin_A price roll and detail of divvy_up allotment to the society's members, Halifax Chief Executive microphone Blackburn said information_technology "will represent the largest single extension of private divvy_up ownership always witnessed in the UK."
The mutually-owned Halifax, with assets of complete 100 billion pounds ($167.8 million), said flotation adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had calculate vitamin_A share monetary_value of between 390 and 450 pence ($6.54 to $7.55) per share if the IPO had necessitate place on Dec. 16.
This equals a market worth of between 10.4 billion ($17.5 billion) and 12 billion pounds ($20.1 billion), and analyst expect the concluding outcome to constitute astatine the top conclusion of this range given the Holocene positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market, former mortgage banker Abbey National Plc.
"The valuation of 12 billion (pounds) is right in line with our expectations," said cock Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analyst agreed and many expect the price on floatation day to be higher, saying that Friday's human_body looked vitamin_A little conservative.
The Halifax said each qualifying extremity will get a basic allocation of 200 shares in a flotation of 2.675 billion shares.
The Halifax induce 6.7 million investing members and two million borrowing members. Of these, at_that_place is an convergence 700,000, which means that the Society represent commit out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs.
Investing members will besides get a variable share allotment depending on how much money they induce in their accounts on particular dates. This will roll from two_hundred shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more.
At its especial cosmopolitan meeting on Feb. 24, over 50 percent of the endow members must vote in favour of the proposal operating_room information_technology will fail. The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote.
The Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market capitalisation in the FTSE 100 index_number of blue-chip firms and constitute surely to endanger Abbey's position as Britain's fifth-largest publicly-owned bank.
It said it visualize way for huge expansion indium the British insurance_policy and long-term savings sectors.