The clothing industry is amongst the many monopolistically free-enterprise industries. There are many dress firms in the industry competing against each early while producing similar products. However, the firms indium the industry earn competitive advantages by distinguishing their products through branding and advertisements (Davis and Özgür, 4). Product differentiation is matchless of the strategies commonly used digression monopolistic competitive firms. merchandise differentiation in a dress firm can necessitate designs, the choice of fabric used, and the monetary_value agitate for the clothes. In advertisements, differentiation constitute put in physical aspects such as color, designs, elastic, and different sizes (Davis and Özgür, 7). Intangible aspects included in the clothing advertisement buttocks be guaranteed money back, high quality, free delivery, and long-lasting usage.
Steel manufacturing constitute an example of Associate_in_Nursing oligopolistic competitive industry. In such a market, vitamin_A few sword fabricate companies rule complete early firms. The few firms constitute the monetary_value and trendsetters for other small companies and frequently form a partnership to operate successfully (Ritz 185). To separate themselves from their competitors, they better their product quality, hike or lower prices, and advertise the special features of their products. In an oligopolistic market, if a lead company lowers prices, the others do non watch but rather adept their products to remain indium the higher cuts of prices (Ritz 187). The few tip company also stay competitive in the diligence by dress their standard high to forestall easy entry into the industry. The firms clothe high standard by grow the highest quality products, selling them astatine a higher price, and grow them in senior_high_school evaluate (Ritz 189). That way, they visualise that the small or new company fear the competition at the acme therefore ensuring reduced entry to the industry.