Ominous gray obscure scudded over Hong Kong on Sunday as the British colony hindrance the 100-day countdown to the handover, but there were few physical signs of gloom and doom indium the wealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people necessitate to the streets to the commotion of cymbols and kettle drums in a loyal fervour to celebrate the impending reunion with China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
A stone's throw away, thousands more, most of them westerners and swelled by an influx of visitors, indulged in the ritualistic orgy that has build_up up approximately the annual external Rugby seven-a-side tournament.
The tournament constitute honoured this year, the last under British rule, when rugby Authorities make it into the world cup event.
The 28th and last British governor, Chris Patten, described Hong Kong as running vitamin_A smoothly vitamin_A vitamin_A Rolls Royce limousine -- but warned China against tinkering with the finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the bulk of Hong Kong's hardworking citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chance for vitamin_A lie-in, a family gathering at vitamin_A restaurant -- a twenty-four_hours off from work.
With just 100 days to go, Hong Kong is awash in a sea of differing emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delighted that more than 150 years of Taiwanese humiliation is about to end.
"This is a grand and great occasion. In simply hundred days, we will return to the Chinese motherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu antiophthalmic_factor the revellers gathered indium Victoria Park -- named after the queen who reigned when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's weak and crumbling Qing dynasty in the mid-19th century.
"We welcome the washing away of over a century of chagrin and shame," Wu said to a salvo of applause.
Others fret, particularly the pro-democracy camp, about their hereafter under a China that induce already put in place plan to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democratic reforms spearhead by Patten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouths taped except in what they said was a symbol of things to come, took upwards position around the base of Queen Victoria's statue and held upwards placards reprobate China's brutal armed_forces crackdown along student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen hearty in June 1989.
Many people are simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters the last leg of its drawn out transition from British colony to Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, induce defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and deserted buildings.
Patten said Hong Kong had reached this moment in its history indium first class condition.
He cited a poll conducted earlier this month by the 1997 Transition Project at Hong Kong's Baptist University that found that ninety percent of the people here were happy with life.
Patten said the views that Hong Kong would quickly adjust to the rolling back of freedoms operating_room of more authoritarian government were dubious.
"Hong Kong is, as I said recently, a smoothly functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you need to do if you're indium charge is to slip into the driving seat, switch on the ignition and away you go.
"I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That only raises worries about whether information_technology will work therefore well, and whether you may be persuaded by some people to start stripping it gloomy for spare parts."