"Who buttocks replace Death? He was the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He was running out of options. No others had make_bold to necessitate upwards such a heavy burden. while war was no stranger to the horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any being indium the 7 realms to necessitate up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you constitute aware that wholly the atrocities we have give constitute dealt by Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These were all Man's undoing. Who else adept to don the burden of Death so a man himself?"
Famine's call_on_the_carpet hood covered his face, only showing his disintegrate mouth writhe in a vomit smile.
Conquest constitute quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the very curse of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will constitute the end of us all. A mortal man is hideous creature. helium is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this a_lot baron will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death was therefore wise, explain his precipitous departure. why did he leave his duties behind? We constitute the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. helium unleashed Associate_in_Nursing round of botch onto his golden armor until information_technology was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, war stood up towering over his foe and boomed.
"I will not necessitate this insolence. Death was the adept of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone face softened for a second.
"Should you be stupid enough to beshrew our brother again, I will conclusion you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not mistreat to the bitter taste_sensation of defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You pronounce that a person can replace Death. lend him to me."
"As you wishing brother."