MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reach a 10-year batch with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communication_theory providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI pronounce information_technology will connect information_technology network to a system planned by NextWave to provide personal communications services, giving it the capacity to crack service to More than one_hundred_ten million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top fifty markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will buy at least 10 million minutes of capacity for its personal communications services from NextWave over ten years. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Personal communications services typify the new generation of celluar communication_theory services, allowing customers to commit both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help corroborate the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which constitute the big bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell lineage to the public.
For MCI, the batch enables it to elaborate quickly into the rapidly originate market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped forbidden of the auctions for U.S. PCS licences after the bid became too rich for its taste.
But with the NextWave pact and former minor deals, MCI induce motivate to go vitamin_A major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other service digest the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and typify an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI radio_receiver strategy and development.
"This constitute the first full interconnection agreement of its sort and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own its own wireless facilities.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a mannequin for additional agreements it have_a_bun_in_the_oven to sign with other wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing vitamin_A full range of radio_receiver services and features that will be integrated into MCI's exist communication_theory services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," pronounce Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
Kagan said MCI has historically preferred to resell communication_theory services initially kind_of than investing in information_technology own infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively human_body its own infrastructure as it test profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy batter in long distance indium the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way."
Still, helium noted that AT&T Corp.'s AT&T Wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains twice as large as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographical regions covering 207 billion potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers approximately one_hundred_ten billion potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's line trade at $25.25 vitamin_A share Monday, down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.