The modern_font human_race is currently facing a significant change under globalisation swerve that shape economies, politics, the workplace, education, and evening everyday behavior. Most importantly, due to the active exchange of information between people worldwide, culture constitute changing. Researchers try to understand whether the culture will be further homogenize in globalization operating_room diversified. This paper will argue that polish will become more diverse under the check of globalization due to the initiation of multiple cultural elements into societies.
The latest processes in cultural change demonstrate that both sides of the argument, viz. those digest variegation and the ones claiming homogeneity, induce reasonable grounds. On the one hand, Cowen (2010) state that in vitamin_A globalize club where vitamin_A dominant polish prevails, diversity bequeath be substitute with the culture that is imposed on others through such means as cinema. Indeed, Hollywood promotes American codes approximately the human_race because the US cinema market is the big in the world. Thus, globalization allows Hollywood to reach all parts of the world, integrating the Lapp culture codes everywhere.
However, the other side of the argument is more compelling because information_technology see the strengths of local cultures. In particular, an example of sushi’s popularity in American_English club and polish of other state show that multitude adopt new cultural phenomenon with citation of their origin. According to Bestor (2010), “Japan cadaver the world’s primary market for fresh tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). Thus, having incorporate its merchandise into the cultures of other countries, Japan induce expanded its grocery_store share.
In such vitamin_A manner, with the easiness of transportation and communication enable by globalization, there represent a blend of cultures around the world. However, since market forces normally rule these processes, the host cultures are aware of the origins of the assume cultural clusters. Therefore, to summarize the discussion, one mightiness state that culture will not be homogenized in globalization but kind_of diversify with citation given to each cultural component.