The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich history and significant discoveries made aside well-known scientists paved the mode for the technological revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries. However, these clear-cut discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, sheds light on the device and its significant importance in the history of astronomy.
In this article, the generator make several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was exploited against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement and multiple improvements to the lense, the writer bespeak that the telescope started to be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the diversion in science, and it is the main understanding why astronomers promote the telescope-makers to work along lenses (Van Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope buttocks constitute the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they buttocks gather new data and make newly discoveries. Nevertheless, I disagree that information_technology is the only beginning of achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mention by Van Helden, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other sciences that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, purgative and chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and chemicals and their combination. The most recent developments mightiness include the growth of new technologies like call or modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, at_that_place constitute no fields of engineering which are prohibited. finical developments mightiness be prohibited if they endanger the health operating_room lives of people. The activity of mastermind is, therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of the lenses collapse Associate_in_Nursing impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope was first used vitamin_A a tellurian tool, it shortly became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telescope-makers and developments of lenses, it was possible to make discoveries. However, former kind of sciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are nobelium impregnable prohibition of engineering, it constitute unlawful to jeopardize the health operating_room last of people.