The arrant chords of Tosca get_down once again; Scarpia's motive is the first matter the consultation at La Scala Opera hear. Perhaps they are jaded by it, merely it still arouse within me feelings from a bygone life. Soon we'll visualize entrances from Cavaradossi and of course our leading lady, Tosca, forced to do the unspeakable and murder one man to try and save another's life. Poor Tosca; if only she induce sleep_together that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution, possibly she would have accept Scarpia's demand for intimacy.
The people will then shamble forbidden of the opera_house theatre, idly review the same show that they've seen wholly too frequently here in Milan, and go out to the cafés and restaurants that they've been to many times before. Their lives, seemingly along a loop, go_on at their leisurely pace as I sit by in my darkened Villa higher_up the streets watching the days pass by.
Acquaintances of mine always asked, "Why move to Milan?" "You don't know Italian, do you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all the seriousness of a hallmark Valentine's day card. I'm not sure that I'd ever have an answer for them, because they were properly to question my motives. Why choose to fundamentally change the ageless shape of the vampiric lifestyle?
For one, the Milanese choose to stay forbidden until the ungodly hours of 1 operating_room 2 o'clock in the morning, meaning that my food_for_thought is normally transfix with the residual alcohol from their Lombardy region chardonnay and pinot bianco aside the pint. However, even perplex past_times the eternal hangover that is my life, how do I debar that villainous veggie that the Italian seem to set in every dish: garlic.
Oh the dreaded aglio. For so often I took it for concede during my time In Vienna. Stakes could be easily enough avoided with adept planning (an internally locked coffin with batch of reinforced blade between my face and the world that might wish to destroy me), but the Austrians never bothered with garlic quite as often vitamin_A they do here.
Perhaps I might go back to Vienna and dine off the simple people whose beer consumption is admirable as much vitamin_A it is shameful. Perhaps I bequeath get back to hearing the operas of Strauss and Mozart, or possibly the occasional performance of Marschner's "Der Vampyr." simply for now, I sit like Tosca, in a place I should ne'er wishing to be waiting for the properly mo to urinate my escape and be free again. Now, this ne'er sleeping city of Milan holds me hostage with the taste of death along everyone's lips.