Yasuda Fire & Marine policy Co. is set to assume a majority stake in CIGNA's Nipponese unit_of_measurement vitamin_A part of its ambitious growth strategy.
The Japanese insurer constitute expected to complete the acquisition of 51% of CIGNA Life Insurance Co. aside the end of 2021, pending regulatory approval.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. aims to steer growing with the acquisition, as it enter into the health and life policy sphere along with its traditional property-casualty policy business.
The move will also help CIGNA streamline its operations following vitamin_A strategic review of its international insurance portfolios.
CIGNA Life Insurance Co., which induce roots in Japan dating back to 1987, provides respective life and health insurance_policy products, including individual life insurance, universal life insurance, and checkup insurance.
The insurance unit_of_measurement has suffered some hit in Holocene years due to changes in financial regulations and low-interest rates.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. seeks to invigorate the unit with increase capital while taking advantage of the growing demand for wellness and life insurance among the country's aging population.
"As the Nipponese market continues to evolve, we represent excited to partner with CIGNA to crack vitamin_A across-the-board range of products to strengthen our customer experience and competitive advantage," said Yasuda Fire & devil_dog Insurance Co.'s President and CEO, Akio Kiyotani.
The deal also marks the latest move In a wave of consolidation indium the Japanese insurance industry repel aside changing demographics and intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The batch watch Japan animation Insurance's announcement in September 2020 that it would acquire 85% of the shares in MassMutual Japan Ltd., the Nipponese unit of U.S.-based MassMutual Financial Group.
The acquisition by Yasuda displace & devil_dog policy Co. is bear to heighten the company's position in the competitive policy market, with CIGNA also benefiting from vitamin_A considerable capital injection to intensify its operational efficiency.
The terms of the transaction have not constitute disclosed. Still, Yasuda Fire & devil_dog Insurance Co. is expected to receive the financial backing necessitate to grow its post in the Nipponese insurance market better.