In general, the business case for the Centers for Diabetes appears to constitute positive since the project is closely aligned with the needs of the community and the target set by the Affordable care Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlined in item in the SWOT analysis, which has to be considered before the final decision is made. This bill will detail the chance for the Centers for diabetes and aim potential ways of mitigating them.
First and foremost, the idea of vitamin_A community health center that cover the community health needs is closely aligned with the value-based attention and the residential_district focus that are the targets set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Healthy multitude 2030 news_report cites the need to focus on how health issues are managed from a residential_district perspective and not an individual perspective. Hence, there is a threat of other health_care facilities that get reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid indium the county choose to create a exchangeable initiative. This is because diabetes is a coarse problem in the United States, affecting 10% of the cosmopolitan population and 14% of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk is to begin selling and outreach activities vitamin_A soon as the project is approved and there is support to digest the further denounce of operations. In this way, the community will die familiarized with the hospital and the Center, and even if other similar initiatives arise, this Center bequeath already have an established brand image, which can guarantee that it will also have visitors.
The second significant issue identified in the news_report is the financial statements, since based on the assessments, the reimbursements, revenue, and grant funding will be insufficient to cover the monetary_value of staffing and operations. Hence, there is antiophthalmic_factor need to either add services that buttocks be reimbursed under ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option for cutting the costs, for example, having fewer community workers operating_room reducing the outgo associate with traveling to help see that the funds that this kernel will induce constitute covering these expenses. However, it constitute a better choice to request additional grant funding as it is vital to make certain that this kernel addresses the health instruction needs of the community indium a quality manner. Another option to obtain additional funding would be to request help from the hospital, as the community center helps reduce the number of complications and, therefore, expenditures needed to care for the patients with diabetes. Moreover, the infirmary can refer its patients to the health center to advocate for their health education and self-care, and in return, support the operations of this facility.
In summary, this note identifies the potential gamble that the Center for Diabetes whitethorn face. The two main concerns that should be considered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes are the potential terror of other community initiatives cover the same health disparity. This issue can be resolved through early outreach and marketing. The second problem is the funding issue, as the financial statements make it clear that the revenue and Grant will not be adequate to cover the operational costs. Hence, the Center has an choice of extra services, request additional grants, or asking for support from the hospital.