If the Board of governor of the United_States Federal Reserve arrangement dress as expected early Friday and votes to elaborate banks' non-banking activities, information_technology will only heighten the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts and diligence officials said.
The Fed constitute expected to vote to appropriate banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive twenty-five percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such vitamin_A securities underwriting, upwards from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 marriage_proposal was free for poster in July, but since then another depository_financial_institution regulator stimulate stolen approximately of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the currentness Eugene Ludwig said his position will begin approving depository_financial_institution affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Comptroller's actions will raise the pressure along Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led the bang to change the law because they wanted to get into early businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms by_and_large opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the postpone have been turned," Litan said. "But it's not vitamin_A two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."  
Both motivate besides reflect stream market realities. The financial services industry, from depository_financial_institution to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already offer checking account-like money market finances and some of the tip stock and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the Christian_Bible of matchless height regulator, the Fed's move from ten to twenty-five percent, "is not material." The Fed has required banks to take certain steps to prevent problems in the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, and its government-insured deposits.
Competitors indium other fields fret that the banks insured deposits constitute a form of governing subsidy giving the depository_financial_institution an unfair advantage when they hazard into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary "basically eliminates any subsidization."
He opposes campaign by some in Congress to keep banks forbidden of certain fields, such as real land or merchant banking, entirely. "It's a error to set merchandise limits, peculiarly in this day and age when we have such vitamin_A dynamic marketplace," he said.