Britain's Britannic Assurance declared on Tuesday a 209 million pound ($336 million) special bonus for life insurance policies, following discussions with the government on ownership of surplus insurance funds.
The payout will use to all "with profits" policies in force on February 17, 1997. Details will be given with the 1996 bonus due to be announced next month.
The company said survive year information_technology discussing with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) ownership of long-term assets, and a way to distribute the surplus to policyholders and shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million British_pound of the excess assets inside the long term fund buttocks constitute attributable to shareholders.
Britannic besides said it intended to addition information_technology dividend for the year by 82 percent to 23 penny per share following an increase in animation profits. This would be the basis for continue the company's progressive dividend policy.
The intelligence upgrade Britannic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or about nine percent, at nonpareil stage before settling for a rise of 29 pence at 832.5.
The money attributable to stockholder human_body part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have rise by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw said, and update figures would be released on March 18.
Britannic besides announced vitamin_A restructuring of its long-run funds and the effect of a strategic reappraisal of IT business.
The review will tip to newly sales management and premium collection systems, streamlining of head office and investment in grocery_store analysis and product research.
The initiatives are have_a_bun_in_the_oven to cut operating monetary_value by around 25 million pounds, based along 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to human_body along its brand, investment management and distribution skills, financial strength and product growth abilities to strengthen its position and improve measure to policy and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund bequeath create two continuing "with profits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other for the ordinary branch -- life and pension_off business.
In future at least 90 percent of the surplus in the with net_income finances will constitute allocated each year to with profits policies. The balance will be shareholders' net_income for transmit to the net and passing account.
The companionship has also created two distinguish non-profit sub finances -- matchless for life, matchless for pensions -- which will contain non-profits concern and both of which will be owned by shareholders.
The stockholder transmit for 1996 will be increased by 23 million pounds watch the announcement of the 209 million British_pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)