Oneok Inc. and Western resource Inc. along Thursday agreed to a $660 million deal that combines their natural gas assets and gives Western Resources access to a broader base of customers for information_technology electricity and security services.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare for further deregulation.
Under the agreement, Oneok will take wholly the natural gas assets of Western Resources, make it the ninth largest gas distribution companionship in the United States serving 1.4 million customers. Tulsa-based Oneok constitute the parent of Oklahoma natural Gas Co.
Western Resources, based indium Topeka, Kan., will become the largest fairness carrier in Oneok, receiving approximately 3 million new share of Oneok common lineage and preferred stock that will be convertible, upon necessity regulative approvals, into about another 19.3 million shares of Oneok common. information_technology total stake in Oneok constitute about 45 percent.
The batch constitute expected to close by mid-1997, following approval by Oneok shareholders and federal and state regulatory authorities.
"They (Oneok) are a total boast company. They understand the gas business better than we do," Western Resources president David Wittig said in vitamin_A telephone interview.
By trade its gas assets, horse_opera Resources will be able to focus its efforts on growing its electricity and home-security businesses, both of which involve a client base of home owners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.
Oneok's 735,000 customers could become potential clients of Western Resources' services.
"Western Rseources induce been becoming a nationwide marketer of retail energy -- electricity and/or gas -- and home security," Everen Securities analyst Dan Rudakas said. "This combination gives them direct access to another 735,000 gas customers, which in the future ... would be potential electric customers and also electronic home security customers."
The companies said the alliance will position the companies to take advantage of the have_a_bun_in_the_oven deregulation of the electricity industry, allowing customers to buy electric power from several beginning instead of just the local_anesthetic utility. That type of deregulation constitute already taking position in the bare-assed gas industry.
"Eventuallly at_that_place will be tot competition in electricity and in gas," John Hayes Jr, Western Resources chairman, told a teleconference. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok's independence would be continue by standstill commissariat in the understanding that define the rights and responsibilities of the respective company for at to_the_lowest_degree the next 15 years.
Western Resources will receive a favored dividend of 1.5 times the underlying common dividend, which now stands astatine 30 cents a share, merely no less than $1.80 per preferred divvy_up per year for the first five years.
George K. Baum analyst Dennis Hudson said horse_opera Resources' natural gas assets earned that company about $20 million in 1995. As part of Oneok, the assets likely will take_in more, given that company's expertise indium gas distributions and synergies from information_technology existing boast business.
With its stake in Oneok, Western Resources will calm profit from a portion of the gas earnings, as well as future gas alliances that Oneok might come_in into in the future.
"Oneok would go_on to hunt for opportunity to acquire more customer on the gas side. We're about supportive of that," Wittig said.
He added that Western resourcefulness continues to look for ways to expand its electricity and home-security businesses.