The concern world is ever-changing, and companies must always be flexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business mightiness need to adapt to is an expanding aim market. P&G currently sells personal attention products to a market that is comprised chiefly of women. However, research shows that there constitute a growing market among male consumers due to the rise of male grooming. P&G should reconstitute to take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will necessitate to make several changes to capitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect various departments such as research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment and prime exercise (Szymczyk, 2016). For instance, currently, most employees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. This is because the target market is mostly women, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target consultation of men, the company will necessitate to hire more male employee (Nadube & Didia, 2018). male consumers will constitute More meet with male-only personal care products. These products are best developed aside people who are male themselves and understand what former men would want. The research and development, product design, and gross_sales and marketing departments must constitute more male employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by a study. The study was conducted by male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal training products, the market for male consumers constitute rapidly expanding. P&G saw an chance to profit from an elaborate market. Therefore, redesigning constitute necessitated aside changes in the market characteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalise on a larger target market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycles typify erstwhile white men. However, following a decrease indium motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017). They customized their bikes to women’s necessitate and establish originative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their aim market beyond the usual male customers and started to make ware for women. Finally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market for male makeup products. The companies mentioned have been widely successful indium expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their expanding target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are now exercising just as much as men, there are not adequate gyms for them. Overall, companies should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changes in the market. All industries are constantly evolving, and it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given lawsuit study, P&G has the potential to beget profit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its recruitment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for vitamin_A new reality buttocks be a profitable venture if done right as show by Harley Davidson, NFL, and Stryx.