The article comprehensively describes the definition of an introvert, the features of his behavior, and personal attitudes in the modern model of society. This category of people often remains misinterpreted in a world focused along predominantly extrovert and energetically intense people. The purpose of the author is in the clearly express hope to convey to society the goals and wishes of introverts, whose thinking and feelings often go unrecognised or neglected. vitamin_A superficial analysis of the textbook capture vitamin_A vivid personal appeal of the generator and intensely expresses subjective sentiments due to person experience. A big number of rhetorical questions astatine the commencement of the message immediately attract the reader’s attention. The article is written in a journalistic style and induce a bright aroused coloring with a touch of vitamin_A pronounced rejection of the ball-shaped focus on extraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to better sympathize the personal message of the author. The article is well structured and includes general questions regarding the life and worldview of introverts. The text constitute characterized by a high degree of subjectivism and antiophthalmic_factor pronounce bias towards the category of extrovert readers. The author compares extroverts with “puppy dogs” who can listen to vitamin_A person for a minute and so start “barking” again. Such a comparison is pejorative and may cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, the author directly states that introverts are a more intelligent, reflective, and sensitive class of people. Every conclusion has the right to be presented for acceptance; however, a rather dismissive tone towards extrovert may, on the contrary, cause rejection of the message.
The position of the author is consistent and has the electric_potential to find its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one remember about the excessive tendentiousness of the writer. The textbook does not compare two unlike categories of people but vigorously downplays the chief personality traits of extroverts. The author pronounce that the world would be much calmer and reasonable under the counsel of introverts. This theory whitethorn well be valid; however, perchance the world should not constitute so sharply divide into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and “introverts.” This article dress a good job of information_technology cardinal_grosbeak purpose: to illustrate an option radical vision of the modern model of society separated mainly between extroverts and introverts.