In a move that has raised eyebrows both locally and internationally, the Chinese government has accused veteran dissenter Wang Xizhe of illegally crossing the adjoin and pursuing those who helped him do so.
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese democracy movement, induce constitute a spine indium the side of the predominate Communist Party for decades. He was last collar in 2014 for speaking forbidden against government corruption and sentenced to eight years in prison.
However, in December 2020, intelligence emerged that Wang had managed to cross the adjoin into Myanmar, where he had sought the help of local_anesthetic pro-democracy activists. It was reported that he was hope to make his manner to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of transgress its home security laws by leaving the state illegally and engaging indium bodily_process that could be harmful to the state. Chinese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" and issued an external warrant for his arrest.
In a statement released via state media, the Chinese embassy in Myanmar accused Wang of "breaking Chinese law by departure the country illegally and engaging in activities that jeopardize national security."
The embassy went on to say that Wang induce "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accept their support and funding, and mistreat up his anti-China activities."
The instruction besides admit a warning to anyone who had provided support to Wang during his escape from China. Chinese authority said that they would "punish badly those World_Health_Organization have been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move aside the Chinese governing induce been knock by human rights groups and pro-democracy activists, who say that it is merely another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand up against the Taiwanese government and speak the truth," said Amnesty International's China researcher, William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it constitute "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government was pursuing those World_Health_Organization had helped Wang during his escape from China. "This is a clear_up misdemeanor of their basic homo rights," he said.
The lawsuit has also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, which has been grappling with its own political crisis since the armed_forces coup_d'etat in February 2021. Many pro-democracy militant in Myanmar fear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanmar authorities to extradite Wang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar's Ministry of foreign Affairs said that it had not received any request for extradition from the Chinese government. The ministry die on to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries" and "always respect and protects the rights of political asylum seekers in accordance with international law."
For his part, Wang has remained noncompliant in the face of the Taiwanese government's accusations. In a statement released through his lawyer, Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights indium China.
"I believe that the Chinese multitude deserve freedom, democracy, and human rights," he said. "I bequeath continue to crusade for these values until they are achieved."