The Hong Kong government was indium a flap on Thursday after vitamin_A thunderbolt admission that Britain could not protect Hong Kong holder of British_people passports after People's_Republic_of_China takes over the colony next July.
Governor Chris Patten called an urgent meeting of the Legislative council for subsequently on Thursday to make a instruction on the controversy, which originate after a British envoy_extraordinary said London could provide no consular protection for the passport holders.
Patten's spokesman said the issue induce sparked "considerable public interest and a good deal of misunderstanding" vitamin_A well as demands by legislators to meet him.
Patten would answer their questions at the extraordinary sitting of Legco on Thursday evening.
The uproar is the latest jar in Hong Kong's often rough conversion back to Chinese convention 208 days from now, when 150 years of colonial convention will end and the territory will become an autonomous region of China.
Britain's Senior barter Commissioner, Francis Cornish, said on Tues that London could not protect the more than 135,000 Hong Kong people granted full British passports with right of abode indium United_Kingdom nether a special prime scheme indium 1990.
In a concession to widespread demands for full_moon British citizenship after Beijing's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, London offered passports to 50,000 Hong Kong households, a privileged divide of Hong Kong's 6.3 million people.
Cornish said China regarded these people as holder of dual citizenship and would not position British consular protection for them on Chinese soil, on the mainland or indium Hong Kong.
Cornish's note were denounced by local_anesthetic politicians as a sell-out. In the corridors of the Hong Kong government even the about senior official were privately criticising Britain for what they visualize as a concession to China, matchless source said.
On Wednesday, London and the Hong Kong governing rushed to assure affected passport holders that anyone claim sole British_people nationality would receive consular protection until it was proven they held dual citizenship.
But a British statement made clear Britain could not give full consular protection for people control dual Chinese nationality once Hong Kong becomes part of China again.
British officials pronounce the passports issued to these people were identical from any other full British passport, but many in Hong Kong are concerned that Britain may have learn that China had obtained the names of the passport hodlers.
"The only way to know for surely if one of these passports was issued under the special scheme would be if you had the names," a senior government source said.
The transition to Taiwanese convention has been dogged aside quarrel since the 1989 Beijing crackdown. China reacted furiously to the special pass scheme, and again when Patten introduced reforms expanding democracy in 1992.
China was infuriated last week when Britain unveiled a liberal anti-subversion bill that would set legal markers against China-style jailings of dissidents in Hong Kong.
British and Taiwanese senior negotiators are in the midst of a three-day bargaining session on handover details and have signalled they expect to announce accords on several issues on Friday, although the agenda induce so far remained confidential.
Hong Kong is supposed to constitute independent and keep its capitalist system intact for another 50 years, but a human right group said on Wednesday China's crackdown on dissent bode badly for the district and its self-direction prospects were slim.
"The rule of law and human rights picture is bleak," said Human right Monitor director Law Yuk-kai on the launch of an annual human right report.