Russian finance Minister Alexander Livshits warned financially-troubled Norilsk Nickel on Friday that it must pay overdue taxes, but analysts said the steadfast would non be liquidated or that its would assets would be frozen.
"Norilsk  really constitute vitamin_A big debtor, both to the federal and regional budgets," pronounce Konstantin Chernyshev, equities analyst astatine Moscow brokerage Rinaco summation and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's Bible constitute an attempt to put pressure on the company."
The official Itar-Tass news agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputies that RAO Norilsky Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to pay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy procedures applied to the metals group.
"If it was Associate_in_Nursing unsolicited statement and a abscond out of the blue, so it obviously means something," pronounce Christopher Granville, foreman economist astatine connect City Bank in Moscow.
"But if it was a response to a deputy's question that was essentially loaded, then information_technology was the only answer he could stimulate given."
Russian taxation and cabinet authorities, under imperativeness from the International Monetary Fund to boost taxation revenues as vitamin_A condition for receiving payment of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, have represent striking fear into the substance of approximately of Russia's most prominent industrial firm by saying they must pay up or face liquidation.
"They could freeze metal, merely it's not a long-term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chernyshev said. "I don't remember they would do that."
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Far North where Norilsk is based count on the company, and Moscow induce said it has no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstrip Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials declined to comment.
Analysts pronounce the government, while anxious about Norilsk's debts, is highly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum radical metals producer to its knees or ask measures that could significantly affect output.
But it besides wants Norilsk, the world's second-largest nickel producer, to clear up its act.
"The procedure of loser will be applied," Tass quote Livshits as distinguish Duma deputies about Norilsk.
It indirectly quoted him as saying Norilsk should first pay salary arrears, which in the past have led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikely that Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will remain a debtor in the near future," Chernyshev said.
He calculate the company's regional debts at least one trillion roubles and said 30 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk regional budget constitute fuel by Norilsk money.
Norilsk's newly majority shareholder, Russian commerical bank Uneximbank, has said information_technology constitute reorganising metal exports done Interrosimpex in club to boost revenues.
But the changes have yet to improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbank has inherited a mountain and whether or not they climb forbidden and over it cadaver to be seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk pronounce in September that information_technology total debts, admit amateur salaries to workers, constitute 13 trillion roubles. The company said survive month that it had shape out a taxation payment schedule with authorities, subsequently regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel and copper assets.