Britain's Serious Fraud Office has so_far to liaison London-based securities houses subsequently a request for help with antiophthalmic_factor French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc divvy_up dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend vitamin_A hand indium Associate_in_Nursing investigation aside the French authorities into alleged market use of the debt-laden impart burrow operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it induce no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of the latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect to dress so. They wholly said they would co-operate to_the_full if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter indium a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Haym_Salomon brother and Swiss depository_financial_institution Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights return in 1994 and, although never named digression Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were under investigation indium July survive year.
The underwriting root also admit Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now own by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Aby_Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, More trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practice is to return notices which require a person or institution to be interviewed or hand over documents, although it buttocks also apply for a search sanction if information_technology wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, information_technology stay indecipherable what period is presently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surround the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been dogged suggestions that some operators were short-selling at approximately the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling share they do not have in the hope of buying them back More cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to inquire volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another example was indium Agust 1995, when vitamin_A knave report that the company induce signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-Norman burrow hustler at that metre denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into the trading activity and erroneous reports surround its shares and the incident might wellspring be the focus of the French probe.