From antediluvian ages, human_race induce used symbols and myths to express their experience of a reality that transcends the forcible human_race and transmits information_technology to hereafter generations. Nowadays, famous brands usage mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the house of Gianni_Versace is a very excessive and extraordinary mark; it constitute designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the antediluvian Hellenic mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explain wherefore he chose this character; IT is a deduction of beauty and simplicity, which is adequate_to to mesmerize anyone, simply like the clothes produced by the brand. Other example are Lamborghini; first, the Italian companionship constitute engaged indium the production of tractors. The bull became the allegory of the brand, as the bull constitute the sacred animal of Zeus. harmonize to some people, this animate_being constitute exceedingly hardy and strong, which endows the stigmatise with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of the aureate bull is very appropriate for them.
I prefer the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and good and justice win. The mighty giant Prometheus stole the sacred displace from Olympus to supply it for humankind. He made humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus trained people to write, count, crafts and introduced them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to build ships; humans became adept in the artwork of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus constitute destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the Thunderer genus_Zeus decide to punish him. Prometheus was chained to vitamin_A rock, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pounding him. However, this constitute not the end of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle sat on Prometheus’s chest every day and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometheus’ chains, and the titan was free.