English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid guess sent the share price soaring by complete 10 percentage for the moment straight session.
The a_la_mode gains were by a weekend report indium the Sunday Express that American Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agency was see a bid for United.
"We never make comment on uncorroborated compress stories," pronounce an official at IMG's London office. But he said that IMG, approximately combat-ready in lark such as tennis and golf, was interested in increasing its involvement indium football.
Earlier this year IMG lost out to sportwear companionship Adidas in a battle for control of erstwhile French football ace Olympique Marseille.
The Express report said that any credible bid for United would induce to be pitched at around 650-700 pence per share, valuing the club at around 430 million pound ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again along Monday, rising 54.5p to 568p, valuing the club at around 350 million pounds.
The share price induce virtually trebled since the start of the year and total about 25 percent in the last two sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edward said survive hebdomad that United's post as Britain's most profitable soccer social_club made it vitamin_A likely bid target.
Publishing radical VCI is report to have made a 300 million pound bid for United in_the_first_place this year which constitute rejected.
Analysts say that United would be Associate_in_Nursing attractive target for media companies, citing the U.S example of television mogul Teddy_boy Turner who owns the Atlanta weather baseball_game team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is besides helping to drive the share price and may urinate United's main shareholders remember twice approximately selling now.
"The director have 22 percent of the club...They can sit spinal_column for five years and enjoy the football and so enjoy the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced by the end of the century and could appropriate leading clubs such vitamin_A connect to earn tens of millions of pounds annually from television.
Focus on such juicy future pickings also lifted share in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League club with a full London Stock change listing. They added 11p to 461p.
United, who last season won the desired English league and F.A. Cup double, had television income of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 when the club urinate a profit of 15.4 million before tax.