Czechoslovak power producer CEZ a.s. on Friday articulate its nine month net profit hit 8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 million for the same menstruation last year, harmonize to international accounting standards, after household electricity necessitate surged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section Petr Voboril told a news conference that higher depreciation write-offs due to the opening of newly installation cut the company's tax obligations, and boosting its bottom line.
The company's gross profit for the period remained flat at 13.1 billion.
Czech accounting set the firm's profit for the first nine months astatine 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ said the consequence did not change the firm's profit forecast under Czech standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 million crowns, match to last year's.
A financial instruction showed CEZ wrote murder 4.1 billion in the first nine months compared with 3.4 billion in the same period of 1995, and paid 4.7 billion in income taxation after 5.7 billion last year.
"Above all, lower of tax obligations in connexion with depriciation policy have influenced this (profit) increase," Voboril said.
He said that boilersuit demand for electricity rose by 5.5 percentage indium the period, and is expected to reach a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for the whole 1996.
Household pulmonary_tuberculosis drove the increase, rising 10.5 percent, piece large node demanded almost two percent More power over the same period of the last year.
Voboril pronounce that vitamin_A recent ruling by the finance Minstry on maximum prices CEZ can sleep_together regional power distributors did not effect consequence thank to the sales increase.
The ministry decided that the utmost average price CEZ can charge for supplies this year constitute 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, upwards two crowns from the last year but below the firm's 1,040 peak expectation included indium business plan.
Voboril said that short-term indebtedness of CEZ increased as well as fiscal expenditures ascribable to unpaid debt from some of the 8 regional distributors, which totalled 3.2 million crowns as of September 30.
CEZ and six of the country's eight regional grid operators had been locked in vitamin_A price dispute with CEZ until the ministry predominate last month.
CEZ is also considering an international bond issue next year as it needs financing but has already flooded the domestic market with paper, Voboril said.
Local analysts welcomed the results but said they did not expect them to help CEZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plagued by vitamin_A deficiency of confidence.
"The CEZ results are slightly better than I expected. CEZ is fundamentally undervalued but genereal market sentiment is not very strong," said Petr Dousa of Zivnostenska Banka. "I don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ shares closed up 14 peak on the Prague Stock Exchange on Friday to close at 937. -- Praha Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003