Mercury finance Co is likely to spend vitamin_A tense weekend with information_technology banker trying to shape out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the company to file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Friday it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial_message paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or spread, between what it pays to borrow money and the higher rates it charges its customers. vitamin_A finance company without a source of funds is the_like vitamin_A retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one fairness analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including standard & Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercial paper to a default denounce Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, failure filing, probably a voluntary reorganization," pronounce Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps citation Rating Co.
He and other analyst noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seeking comment on the company's funding Friday afternoon.
Aside from the company's stream inability to sell debt, mercury is also confront a host of stockholder lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net_income income over the past 4 years by a total of approximately $90 million because of accounting irregularities.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for the company unless there is a judgement indium favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admission of misstatements make information_technology comfortable for the sharheolders to prove their case, departure only the questions of who would have to pay how much, one security_system lawyer said.
"Securities laws are very, very simple," pronounce Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If there constitute an ommission or misstatement of a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market capitalisation plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, found on the thirteen steer fall of Mercury's share and the 172 million shares the companionship said it had outstanding late survive year. That reduces the fair-mindedness cushion the company has available to demo its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also pronounce the company had about $1 billion in loans receivable on its books at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to demo creditors.
"No one has question the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmiotek said.
Also, quicksilver has generally been well regarded indium the sub-prime citation quality loan business, which could aid it negotiate with its banks and continue vitamin_A vitamin_A going concern, pronounce analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said indium vitamin_A statement information_technology is indium discussions with its lenders to satisfy working capital needs, but that it could not predict the outcome of those discussions.