The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Peking along a roll of issues including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was continue a low profile while in Beijing, vitamin_A U.S. embassy official said.
However helium was due to hold talks with Deputy foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with foreign curate Qian Qichen was on the agenda before Godhead left on Th for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit next month by secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a across-the-board range of other issues would almost surely be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomatist said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentence of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three old_age in a labour camp, as well as evident plans to try some_other pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plot to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say sexual_intercourse with China induce generally better In recent months, merely there have been frictions indium the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear gross_sales to Pakistan.
"I think wholly issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at wholly if that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Islamic_Republic_of_Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continue to maintain that People's_Republic_of_China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the Washington_D.C. Times said last week consisted of a especial industrial furnace and high-tech symptomatic equipment.
Burns also pronounce human rights issues were likely to constitute raised.
Diplomats pronounce Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrive in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over homosexual rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China along Nov 21-22 on a trip originally announced indium July.
The visit would mark the highest point indium relations since affiliation plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June, 1995 -- a actuate that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towards a possible exchange of presidential chew_the_fat during 1997.
Among prominent issues that could spark United_States anger are the alleged nuclear gross_sales and China's human rights record, while Beijing incrimination Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. official said Lord had see the possibility of exsert his actuate beyond South Korea when helium leftover Washington last week, but did not finally decide to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China subsequently a chew_the_fat to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more (listed) firms necessitate in such takeovers, regulation and supervision induce become vitamin_A tough task," pronounce one psychoanalyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central governing should not delay until there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in other areas, including a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.