Australia-based transport equipment hire and logistics firm, Brambles Industries Ltd, report a 15.8 percent profit lift for the 1995/96 year along Friday despite flat Australian and European economies.
Surging profits from Brambles' U.S. and European CHEP pallet hire joint venture with Britain's GKN Plc compensated for otherwise slow growing from Australia, the company said.  
"The continue improvement in our performance reflects, in part, the successful retionalisation of our wholly owned business and impregnable growth from our CHEP joint ventures," Brambles Chief Executive John Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, indium particular, continues to justify our confidence in information_technology long term growth prospects in the region," he said in Bramble's net_income statements.
Brambles' net profit rose to A$215.1 million (US$169.9 million) for the year to June 30, 1997 from A$97.7 million in 1994/95, merely the previous year's result was sabotage by antiophthalmic_factor large abnormal loss.  
Pre-abnormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the top end of analysts' expectations.
Pre-tax profits rose 13 percent and 30 percent from EU and the associate States respectively, piece Aussie profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas profits grew astatine twice the rate in Australia and the swerve represent probably to continue," John_Fletcher said.
"In particular we expect further part from CHEP in European_Union and North America," he said.  
Fletcher later told Reuters this strong peformance from Bramble's non-Australian operations had encouraged it to actively look at further skill outside Australia.
"You should predict approximately acquisition shape indium the Northern Hemisphere, but in business we already operate indium here," he said, referring to areas like transport equipment rentals and records managements.
Looking ahead, he said strong contribution from the United States and Europe should continue to offset soft Aussie conditions and help produce profit growth.  
"We haven't got Associate_in_Nursing expectation that we will get besides much help from this economy ... for at to_the_lowest_degree another six months," helium said. "But wholly in wholly we've perplex enough matter going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he added.
The consequence generally pleased analysts, who also pointed to the strong U.S. pallet operation as the main bullish note.
"CHEP United_States is the outstanding area," said Macquarie fair-mindedness analyst Ian Myles.
"As long as they're saying positive things about CHEP in the USA then they'll be alright and there's a reasonable amount of momentum there," some_other Sydney transport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares close_up up five cents At A$18.90 against a voiced market overall.