Financial services and property group Liberty International Holdings on Th unveiled a move into the British pensions grocery_store in ventures involving the British_people telecommunication Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty is establish its own pension company, Liberty International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pound ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes pronounce in a joint statement they were also setting up a new subordinate called Hermes Liberty International Pensions to crack specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension dodge constitute giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with vitamin_A 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon pronounce Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track phonograph_record would help it to supply quality and competitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, pronounce Liberty external Pensions still required approval of Britain's department of Trade and Industry but was differently ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meet of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also induce the systems...and the administration. We along the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investing management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey pronounce Hermes had approached Liberty International only to happen the group had been considering Associate_in_Nursing near to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds along this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. matchless think one step at vitamin_A time is quite_a adequate for us."
He pronounce the venture would probably not be upwards and run until the first quarter of next twelvemonth as regulatory approval beginning had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom pension Scheme to transfer assets to the newly Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the newly venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the boastful indium the country, constitute bequeath to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which constitute held through vitamin_A majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.