Bre-X mineral Ltd. has been soundless since it said last month that it formed a partnership with the Son of the Indonesian ruler Suharto, a motivate that has worried shareholders and prompted regulators to seek more information.
Despite a whirl of rumours and persistent questions that have sent the Canadian_River mining company's shares on a roller-coaster ride, Bre-X has maintained a dogged silence.
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has non spill_the_beans to the compress for weeks. Company officials bequeath take calls only from vitamin_A handful of favoured analysts, harmonize to market sources.
"I haven't had whatever calls returned," said gold analyst twist Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's vitamin_A bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing questions about its business in Republic_of_Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with the stock price -- Bre-X induce take instead to leak to the grocery_store carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of antiophthalmic_factor story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing its links with Sigit.
The clause referred to Sigit's potential ties with the Indonesian army, stated that matchless of Bre-X's Indonesian partners induce been bought out and asserted that aureate giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to push Bre-X into a risky deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refuse to respond and still induce not said whether information_technology endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear_up matter up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."
Rumours have shrouded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential contracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute induce put vitamin_A cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son constitute expected to aid the company clear_up up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they can get everything within vitamin_A couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said helium spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would non comment along the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for cosmopolitan interest purposes."
Still, statements in the article and other gossip were necessitate its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other exploration companies in Asia have complain the uncertainty has hurt their stocks.
Minorca Resources Inc., vitamin_A Canadian_River mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, platinum Askatindo Karya Mineral, has establish itself along the defensive.
Talk approximately Askatindo being bought forbidden constitute unfounded, Minorca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.
Horst pronounce he had a batch of unanswered questions approximately Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son too. "To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X constitute relatively cool."