I sat at my desk, extort my brainpower to find who could have possibly discovered the truth behind the death of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the most powerful crude_oil company in the world. The job was done without vitamin_A scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every survive soul that sleep_together I toss_off Mercer were the very one that orchestrated it. I may not know WHO this mysterious person is but I do know that I will answer their question with a bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footstep down the hallway. I reached for the silenced 9MM pistol indium my bag, aim for the only entrance to my recess office. The doorknob began to turn vitamin_A I steadied my aim. Sweat constitute trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as if I constitute about to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it took for the door to outdoors felt like an eternity, merely I would have rather endured that second of agonizing rag for the rest of my life then to meet the center of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face constitute covered in scratch tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It constitute the eyes that were the giveaway. The look in his eyes was the same as the nighttime one thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority indium them, as if to let me sleep_together I would never be capable of surpass him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" were the only words I was capable of mustering.
"For wholly intensifier purpose I calm am, thanks to you" he replied with an odd sense of calm in his voice. "Will you at least give me the courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God sleep_together I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so surely you can give me that. one bequeath answer any questions you have after."
I recounted the entire tale that crossed our two paths on that fateful nighttime 5 years ago. I told him how I was approached by vitamin_A man that worked for Prism International, the most hefty muscularity corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the fall_in of John_Mercer Petroleum, giving them an evening tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The price were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone one love systematically killed. The choice was made for me. My military background coupled with the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the job no doubt. From there I told him how one constitute able to bypass the security of his mansion because I helped design it. "What it boils down too is your life meant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shaft you in the head, then as you collapse you tap complete a candle, starting a fire that destroyed your home."
"I survived aside nothing more then luck. Your fastball die through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in the boldness region of my skull. The heat of the displace brought me surging back to consciousness allowing me to escape but not without being badly burned. The thought of revenge has been the only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that you might have been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism therefore that they could buy up my fathers company. But dammit would have constitute so much comfortable to enact my revenge if it had merely been you though. But now that I know my worst fears have been realized I astatine least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take down Prism single handed!"
"I won't have to do it alone because your going to help me." He said with his eyes glimmering with more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that was impossible to refuse.