Outboard Marine Corp said it is only five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will consequence indium more charges against earnings in 1997 and possibly indium 1998, the company said.
Restructuring is approximately "five percent complete as far vitamin_A going gloomy the road and getting the savings," said spokesman Stan Main. "That does not mean that we've taken only five percentage of our restructuring charges ... There will likely be more charges during '97 and perhaps even into '98."
Shares In outboard_motorboat on Friday constitute off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
The Waukegan, Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines reported fourth-quarter profits Th that, excluding restructuring charges, beat Wall street estimates.
Analysts cautioned, however, that a turnaround astatine Outboard cadaver a long-run project.
"They're going to be continuing this restructuring process indium '97 and they're going to continue to have some more charges ... They describe the phase they're indium now as the discovery process," said Lehman Brothers psychoanalyst Harriet Baldwin.
A key mo could come Tuesday when Outboard executives are scheduled to meet with analysts and investors indium newly York.  
Expected to be in attendance are the principal of Greenway Partners, an investing firm tip by former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein. Greenway bought an 8.5-percent stake indium Outboard this summer.
Although the firm is known for activism, Greenway so far has not pressured Outboard to alter course, Main said. Nor has there been further communication between Greenway and company executives since initial discussion indium August, he said.
Analysts speculated there could be fireworks next week operating_room at the January sixteen yearly meeting of shareholders, who are pronounce to be growing impatient for a cohesive recovery plan.  
A restructuring was set in motion this year aside foreman executive Harry Bowman, who came aboard in 1995, when the stock was trading in the gloomy 20s. Bowman continues to deliberate complete how to fix outboard_motorboat and identify assemble stay to be put in place, analysts said.
The business is under evaluation from top to bottom, Main said. Once restructuring constitute complete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," he said.  
"Longer term, we could get into merchandise that would not be marine related. But our initial focus complete the next 2 to 3 years is to fix the business that we're in and then perhaps spirit at other areas that might be less cyclical or seasonal," said Main, who is director of strategical planning.
Bowman has spoken of finding more stability for Outboard, which suffers More from boating's boom-bust cycles than rivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, which has diversified into bowling, fishing and camping gear.
Outboard sees opportunities to enter other markets -- such vitamin_A motorcycles, snowmobiles and personal watercraft -- via its innovative FICHT fuel injection engine technology, Main said.
Spending on capital and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended Sep 30, fell to $52.7 million from $66.5 million the year before, but spending on FICHT is holding steady as the company converts more of information_technology engine line to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHT engines to trader will begin in December and consumers bequeath visualize the engines in January. vitamin_A promotional roll-out is underway.
The company plans to convert its entire outboard engine lineage above 20-hp to FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than their traditional equivalents, Main said.