about people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed and certain vitamin_A steer behavior to people all the time. The virtue included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical criterion constitute termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These impression induce become misguided, undesirable, and incompatible in modern America (Schlereth, 2018). They induce shifted to values that nobelium longer have classical ideas of wisdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other base behaviors.
In previous years, there represent low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, which maintained good morals and behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to destructive behaviors that contribute to higher rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the best ways of devising it. In modern America, a character has been substituted, and about youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants constitute non socializing with others, while now women are educated, and immigrants share ideas with natives. Men exploited to work for wage and get involved in political_science piece women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. indium literature, each epoch induce a unlike root according to the manner we understand life (p. 693). The Victorian era focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and ethnic identity (Schlereth, 2018). modern literature concentrate on the theme of loss, despair, and politics. Victorian era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American.
The priggish era and modern American_English have similarities in how the people live in the two ages. In the 2 generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted the world of literature and changed people’s lives on how they see literature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote a poem, ‘The cry of the children’, which has a message about industrialization on child labor. The poem narrates child labour which induce become democratic due to new machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skills. Most people get involved in literature where they compose poems that could talk of their stream situations and life experiences.
The Victorian and modern American eras have impacted changes to human life. For example, indium England, the rank of indictable offences reduced by 50% and the population originate from 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduce from 92000 to 81000. The people learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life. In the 2 eras, men and women understood their roles, learned formal and informal skills, and could interact and socialize. People developed morals, and they were hardworking and successful indium business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and invention that contributed to current technological advancements.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. During the Victorian era, people measure cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American induce derailed from all the norms and changed the way of life. there are practices of immoral demeanor such as prostitution, many divorces, many crimes, and vitamin_A lack of seriousness in religious belief. Most people have discourtesy and ignorance of everything in the stream world. Victorian-era multitude were religious and valued their religion, but a few currently dress the same.
All multitude were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn their roles, get an education and interact with to_each_one other. Most people get involved indium literature where they write poems about their current situations and life experiences. multitude could write poems sensitizing an issue affecting the society for the society to take necessary measures. In the two eras, people learned formal and informal skills, which helped them handle different issues in society.