Kellogg Co. on Friday reported a drop of More than 30 percentage in its third quarter profits as its cereal volume shed in an intensely free-enterprise market.
Kellogg, which makes corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is fighting back, launching selling plans for the fourth one-fourth that constitute aimed at boosting its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said.
The company, the world's biggest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, said its net income for the third quarter fell to $159.5 million, including a $21.3 million charge, from $230 million a year ago. along a per share basis, Kellogg's earnings dropped twenty-nine percent to 75 cents, with fewer shares outstanding, from $1.05 survive year.
Kellogg said its overall sales skid 9 percent to $1.68 billion from $1.84 billion as continue decrepit prices for breakfast cereals offset a one percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly digression competitive conditions indium the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in vitamin_A statement.
Analysts estimate that Kellogg's domestic grain sales volume barbarous 9 percentage to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can't detail it. It constitute a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume constitute down," Sir_Bernard_Lovell added.
Kellogg said its fourth fourth 1996 earnings likely will show a slight lift from the seventy-seven cents it earned a year ago. beginning one-fourth 1997 earnings, however, English_hawthorn not match the ninety-nine cents gain in the 1996 period.
"It's a dispute comparison," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. grain sales volume and the outlook for earnings, dropping $1 at $64.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier, it set a new 52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall was sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocery stores, mass merchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking ahead, Kellogg refused to outline what promotional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.
Analysts said they did not expect the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupon or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's sort of leftover to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg psychoanalyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There constitute No indication that, at this time, they induce shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. early major manufacturers also cut monetary_value this year as they battled for market share and tried to jump-start consumer purchases.
But those price cuts unique apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Ian_Smith Barney analyst Saint_David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices induce to come down further," Rabinowitz said.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery_store store fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended Aug. 11, according to the most recent data available, compare with vitamin_A year earlier.
Kellogg's gross_sales volume declined in that menstruation by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a grocery_store divvy_up of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.