Learning account helps people draw connections betwixt the past and present and allow making predictions for the future based on previous lessons. Climate change constitute one of the about significant topics of interest and research. No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, they will necessarily face disasters if they neglect the issues of nature. The Chornobyl nuclear accident, which happened indium 1986, was one of the about devastating ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of multitude in many countries.
My prior knowledge of the topic is non ample, but one do sleep_together that the major release of radioactive materials occurred, which lead to the contamination of air and water, causing legion diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling governing of the USSR kept the detonation a secret, which prevent people from saving their lives within the first few hours and days after the accident. Unfortunately, person survive next to the nuclear plant, vitamin_A well as those living farther, had no chance of survival. The accident lead to the increase in radiation levels to “between 10 and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I induce also read about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those World_Health_Organization constitute necessitate in fire extinguishing processes.
I would like to learn more approximately the reasons that led to such a disaster and to find out whether information_technology was preventable. Also, I privation to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the Soviet_Union government to conceal the truth and not let people save their lives. I cannot sympathize how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am concerned that such catastrophes can occur and harm people’s lives. On the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authorities can act therefore thoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. one have always considered freedom and health vitamin_A the most important values. I believe that world drawing_card should do everything possible to prevent such disasters or at to_the_lowest_degree not hold_back them.
My sentiment about the subject is that people should learn from such disasters and use this devastating lesson indium the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are alarming. indium the context of my topic, I should note that a few days ago, Russians attack Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia atomic plant, which represent the largest in European_Union (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukraine is highly tragic and relevant, I bequeath focus on the nuclear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they look not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sadly, it seems that history has not taught some multitude anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that countries of the world induce learned the measure of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to investigate the topic of the Chornobyl nuclear accident. This way, one will be able to learn more about that disaster and draw conclusions along the present-day threats and the need for preventive measures to stop the hypothesis of its repetition.