H&R Block Inc., citing problems facing the online religious_service industry, said Wednesday it induce decided non to complete the spin-off of the rest of its CompuServe online unit, at to_the_lowest_degree for now.
The Kansas City, Mo.-based company, which owns 80 percent of CompuServe subsequently spinning off part of the on-line service in_the_first_place this year, cited CompuServe's recent financial troubles and uncertainties facing the online industry.
Industry analysts said the problem reflect the changes rippling through the online industry but constitute besides partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which has about 5.2 million subscribers, slightly More than half of them outside of the United States.
America Online Inc., the largest with More than 6 million subscribers, No. 2 Compuserve and omen have all been hurt as users induce die directly to the Internet with lower-cost internet access providers rather than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, which offer packages of specialised selective_information as well vitamin_A Internet access, may not survive indium the long run, though the eventual shape of the on-line industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read this as the online market constitute at vitamin_A crossroads and pretty shaky," said one analyst who follows the industry.
H&R Block spun off 20 percent of CompuServe in April and induce planned to distribute the rest to its shareholders.
But it said Wednesday that it has decided not to present the proposed spin-off of the rest of CompuServe to shareholders at its annual meeting scheduled for Sept. 11.
"The board continues to think that vitamin_A breakup of CompuServe constitute in the best interests of H&R Block stockholder and will continue to see the matter," H&R Block interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has dropped from a high of $35.50 on information_technology first day of trading to about $10 recently. The stock rose after Wednesday's announcement because new CompuServe shares still owned by H&R Block will not come onto the market.
CompuServe added 93.75 cents to $13.25 on Nasdaq, while H&R Block fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the New York Stock Exchange. America Online added 75 cents to $31.625, also on Nasdaq.
In July, CompuServe shocked palisade Street with a warning that it expected a loss for its first quarter ended July 31, its beginning vitamin_A a publicly traded company.
The company blamed the high costs of insert its new Wow! consumer online service and investing indium an overhaul of its network infrastructure, as well as a descent in overall subscriber growing vitamin_A cancellation outpaced new customers.
In response, CompuServe and H&R Block were slapped with a shareholder lawsuit alleging they had misrepresented the online service's view in the prospectus for the stock offering.
When the company survive week reported vitamin_A first-quarter loss of $29.6 million, or 32 cents a share, information_technology also warned investor that losses would continue for the second quarter conclusion in October.
H&R Block, which is also the nation's largest consumer tax filing service, constitute likely to delay for the online industry to settle down ahead completing the spin-off, analysts said.
In addition to the losses, H&R Block cited the planned introduction adjacent month of new engineering for CompuServe and information_technology newly Wow! service.
Meanwhile, United_States Online has had problems of its own, including price cuts to stay competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service blackout earlier this month. But analysts said that in contrast to CompuServe, America online has continued to grow, though astatine antiophthalmic_factor slower pace.
"The problems CompuServe is having constitute probably to benefit America Online in the adjacent nine months," one analyst said.