British_people National Lottery hustler Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted grim interim profits as income from scratchcard gross_sales fell by complete 450 billion British_pound ($750 million).
Camelot chief executive Tim Holley also told Reuters that the plan second weekly National lottery suck would be launched along February 5 and be held every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has faced a wild_leek of unfavorable_judgment over its pot earnings since the drawing was establish two years ago, reported pre-tax profits of 31.5 billion British_pound on sales of 2.1 billion pounds for the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding company -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 billion pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the hebdomadally National Lottery gamy rose 2 percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two one-third of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Sabbatum draw, an event which is telecast live and induce become a rite for many Britons.
But gross_sales of Camelot's "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds survive year to 419 million this time.
Camelot executives said that the descent in scratchcard sales was to be expected as the initial enthusiasm generated aside their introduction in March 1995 waned.
"Mirroring the receive of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million British_pound per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
Chief executive Holley said that the second weekly draw should boost sales of home lottery game tickets by 15-20 percentage from their current weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot said that over one billion pounds -- fifty percent of turnover -- had been handed out in prize money in the first half and that 567 billion pounds had die to "Good Causes" -- including Jacob's_ladder and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over forty percentage of employee_turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, make information_technology the world's most efficient drawing operator.
Profit after tax constitute just under matchless percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign drawing companies were baffled digression the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plan to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.