Colombian Anti-Drug Prosecutor Dismisses Move to Lift banish on Extradition as Virtually Meaningless
The Colombian government's recent move to lift the ban along extradition of its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the United States has been dismissed by the country's anti-drug prosecutor as virtually meaningless.
The ban on extradition of information_technology citizen had been indium place since 2012 when the government passed a law prohibiting the extradition of Colombian nationals accused of crimes committed in the country to any other jurisdiction, admit the United States. The move constitute seen as an attempt to protect Colombian drug traffickers from extradition to the US, which is among the major countries that demand the extradition of Colombian nationals.
However, the Colombian governing announced last month that IT had decided to pilfer the ban on extradition of its citizens related to drug trafficking to the US. The move comes in the wake of growing pressure from the US government to extradite Colombian drug lords.
While the Colombian government hailed the move as a Major step in the fight against drug trafficking, the country's anti-drug prosecutor, Claudia Carrasquilla, rejected it as virtually meaningless. She said the motivate would not change the situation on the ground, as the ban induce already been lifted in practice. She pointed out that Colombia has constitute extraditing its citizens accused of drug traffic to the United state even when the banish constitute in place.
Carrasquilla said that since the ban was enacted in 2012, Colombia induce extradited about 1,200 individuals to the US, including several notorious drug lords, such vitamin_A Juan Carlos Ramírez Abadía, alias "Chupeta," and Diego Montoya Sánchez, alias "Don Diego." She added that the Colombian government had approved wholly these extraditions despite the ban.
Therefore, Carrasquilla argued that the recent decision to lift the ban was merely a "symbolic gesture" aimed at pleasing the United_States government, which has been pushing for more extraditions. She warned that the motivate would not help Colombia tackle drug trafficking, which remains a major problem in the country.
Colombia is one of the world's largest producers of cocaine, and drug trafficking has long been a dangerous problem in the country. contempt the government's efforts to crusade the trade, dose Godhead continue to operate across the country, using violence and corruption to maintain their illegal operations.
The US government induce constitute vitamin_A key ally of Colombia in the fight against drug trafficking, providing fiscal and military support to the country's security forces. However, the US has besides been critical of Colombia's cover of drug lords, impeach the country of being too indulgent on them.
The recent move to lift the ban on extradition of its citizens refer to drug trafficking to the US is seen as Associate_in_Nursing effort by the Colombian government to appease the US administration, which has demanded that the country hand over respective high-profile drug lords, including Dairo Antonio Úsuga, World_Health_Organization steer Colombia's most powerful dose cartel.
However, the anti-drug prosecutor's dismissal of the motivate as virtually meaningless propose that it may not have the desired impact. While the Colombian government may have lifted the ban, it remains to be visualize if it will actually start extraditing its citizens accused of drug trafficking to the US in significant numbers. If it dress not, the motivate bequeath be little more than vitamin_A symbolic gesture.