Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors and decisions are often the central scope of sociological inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be visualize as an illustration of such decisions and behaviors that have led to severe issues with multiple implications. To sympathize the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as vitamin_A conflict between two major groups constitute apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth century flinty (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city that hosted such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the town started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people left searching for better employment and living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA, 2021). The majority of residents are Black, and a third is White. The poorness rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median old_age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situation indium Flint is alarming, and meaning changes constitute needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials in collaborationism and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve information_technology until 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the urine source due to the difficulties with maintaining the existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed official due to their dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water choice standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were forced to take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): Causes
One of the central issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget could hardly see right maintenance of pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). ascribable to the economic situation indium the city, the public had less control over the actions and decisions of Associate_in_Nursing emergency manager and Governor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claims received little attention as the authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: sociable Concept Applied
When addressing the causes of the crisis, it is necessary to apply the concept of class. Although respective scholars note that class is a subjective construct created for analytical purposes, this notion is vitamin_A relevant component of population stratification (Neilson, 2017). multitude identify with a particular group, such as workers (proletariat) or big business owners (bourgeoisie). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs of big businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theory: Class
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainly divided into the proletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are working people with little resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved aside revolution. The rotation can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalescence with a part (minority) of conservative and proletariat or due to violent struggle. Marx believed in the victory of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
In the situation indium Flint, the official took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities made some decision to allocate funds to boost the development of the economy supporting business. However, the proletariat constitute the class deprived of gamey living standards as poor people had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water constitute the resource that became central to the conflict between the two classes. Proletariat won the struggle, which could be explained by the success of the peaceful rotation with the coalition of workers and approximately part of business owners.
Marxist Perspective see the Crisis (Social Concepts)
The discussion of the crisis from the Marxist theory of class perspective makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civil society and race. Civil club is regarded as a construct bringing society to balance and ensuring that wholly groups’ interests are addressed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that buttocks constitute applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate in this population is also the highest (Data USA, 2021). This radical has the lowest access to proper living weather (good neighborhoods), employment, and health care. This is the about vulnerable group that constitute the primary force empowering the civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint urine crisis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the estimate that classes are analytic constructs. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small concern owners, big business owners, officials, scientists, and others were communicating and collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effects on wholly of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are aim constructions, although they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they English_hawthorn sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is Associate_in_Nursing example of the conflict and its resolution. Although the focus was initially on the interest of businesses and economic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choice and address the water issue. The spokesperson of different classes and clusters of society formed the civil society that became the power bringing the solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It is clear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.