Apple computer Inc., struggling to stay the teacher's pet among computer makers, is turning a modified version of its handheld Isaac_Newton organizer into an inexpensive portable computing_machine for students.
The computer maker on Monday will uncover the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machine that looks like a grown-up's laptop with a keyboard and a flip-up screen, but in vitamin_A furrowed casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to sell the machine directly to elementary and high schools, beginning early next year, as an alternative to personal computers. For the price of a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school buttocks buy three eMates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government says we need to get to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio by the year 2000," said Jim Groff, general manager of Apple's information appliances group. "I would say the eMate is the only credibled vehicle for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple, the merchandise could keep educators from abandoning the company as the leading supplier of computers for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for something like this in a classroom setting is tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indication to educators that Apple is one of the few company spending time extending computing to more and more kids."
Apple needs a typical merchandise to set itself isolated from other personal computer makers crowding into the education market, analysts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., still enjoy strong educational sales, sales of IBM-compatible personal computers by companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. constitute growing much faster.
Apple's computer induce always been the favored tool for teaching children how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of cheap PCs, schools are lupus_erythematosus likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year, of all the computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent bequeath be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible machines, according to a recent report by Quality Education Data, an instruction market researcher. In the previous school year, the purchasing plans were 61 percent macintosh and 38 percent PC.
"The numbers are overwhelming in favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, president of CCA Consulting Inc., another tracker of technology leverage by schools.
"No school district can yield to make a mistake" when picking computers they will use for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that the eMate is not the company's answer to competitors' inroads.
Instead, he said, the device was built for schools asking for a cheap, powerful computer that can crack educational software_program and internet connections -- as well as endure rough handling aside kids.
"When we introduced the Newton 3 old_age ago, it was a solution indium search of Associate_in_Nursing application," Groff said. Education turned out to be one of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil vitamin_A beefier variant of the Isaac_Newton MessagePad along Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better internet capabilities, easier connection to PCs and built-in word processing and spreadsheet software.
Analysts said, however, that the eMate is the more interesting device. Teachers and students will like it because it is not as esoteric and arduous to run as a traditional personal computer.
"Kids constitute having to learn more about how to run a computer than about reading and writing," McGuire said. "The ability to have the kid just turn on the device and get properly into the writing assigment is really valuable."
The eMate weighs 4 pounds (1.8 kg) and fits into a backpack. It can run for a week on rechargeable batteries, according to Apple.
The machine features a built-in word processor, drawing and equation-drawing course_of_study and an address book. With an optional modem and software, students can crop the Internet.
Still, the eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because its software is based on the Isaac_Newton function system, it cannot scat the thousand of educational programs written for the Macintosh and for PCs running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help the companionship place more its computers on students' desks.
"There's 52 million shout (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," pronounce Robert Kondrk, Apple's director of education product lines. "We've known for years this is an opportunity, but we didn't have the technology to do it before. We do now."