NatWest Markets, the investment trust arm of National Westminster Bank, along Mon named Peter Hall as the man to run its expanding operations but early question over the bank's scheme remained, analysts said.
NatWest said Hall, who currently runs its American operations, would take complete as chief operating officer of the investment bank, reporting to foreman executive_director Dean_Martin Owen.
At the Lapp time, NatWest Markets said it would streamline origination and distribution functions into matchless Global Financial Markets division from the current capital markets and treasury divisions.
NatWest said no job losses would result from the consolidation.
The bank induce been along the acquisition chase recently, bribe bodied finance boutique joule O Hambro Magan in October, spending $590 million on United_States primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 billion pounds on Gartmore, the British investment_company manager. information_technology also acquired U.S. merger and acquisitions specializer Gleacher for $135 million.
But analysts stimulate express concern that NatWest will happen it difficult to bring these all together, contempt the fact that the businesses seem to pride each other.
Some feel that NatWest is spending large amounts of cash on buying businesses that could be near the height of their business cycle.
"The NatWest grocery_store business constitute racy and it buttocks make returns while information_technology is still building," said one analyst. "But vitamin_A revenue downswing will tend to hit the players who constitute building rather than those who are already established."
Currently, investment banks are enjoying generally the low-inflation, firm growth conditions seen in many major economies with AN accompanying goodish amount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But vitamin_A substantial downturn on Wall Street, bode by many strategists, could leave some high-cost acquisitions looking a fiddling less appetizing, analyst say.
Owen said the fast growth of NatWest markets, both organically and by acquisition, had led him to the stopping_point that the day-to-day operational direction should be separated from strategy, client development and financial supervision.
"As President and COO, Peter will be charged with implementing our operational plan, leaving me More meter to work with global product heads to shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were felicitous that NatWest had brought an insider to the job.
"Sometimes it gets hard to digest continuity and things can start to fall apart," said one analyst. "I would class this appointment vitamin_A continuity, so that's good."