Lear Corp., promote its quest to supply complete auto interiors, said Fri information_technology agreed to buy the legal_document panel and trim parts unit_of_measurement of Denmark-based Borealis Holding AB.
Lear said it signed a memo of understanding to assume Borealis Industrier AB for undisclosed terms.
Based indium Gothenburg, Sweden, Borealis Industrier manufacturers instrument panels, door panels, climate systems, outside reduce and various erstwhile components for the European car and truck industry.
Borealis Industrier had 1995 sales of about $230 million and owns five plants in Sweden that employ approximately 1,800 people.
Primary customers for the concern include Swedish carmakers Bachelor_of_Arts Volvo and Saab Automobile AB and truckmaker Scania AB.
Borealis Holding is owned by Finnish state-controlled oil and muscularity group Neste Oy  and Norwegian state-owned oil group Statoil AS.
Completion of the transaction is subject to blessing aside the Swedish competition authorization and other conditions.
Lear said the acquisition supports IT strategy of having in-house capability to provide tot self-propelled Department_of_the_Interior systems, including instrument panels.
"Not only dress this acquisition strengthen relations with our European customers, but it positions Lear as the only independent automotive supplier indium the world with in-house capabilities indium wholly five Department_of_the_Interior systems -- broadening the appeal of our already strong one-stop-shopping competitive advantage," Lear Chairman Kenneth Way said in vitamin_A statement.
The deal constitute the latest of antiophthalmic_factor series of consolidation moves in the automotive interior market. Edward_Lear earlier this year purchased carpet and floor-mat maker Masland Corp. for $384 million, and last twelvemonth bought doorway panel and comfort maker Automotive Industries Inc for $626 million.
Lear's U.S. operations include the manufacturing of a across-the-board range of self-propelled interior components.
The company's line was unchanged Friday at $38 a share along the New York lineage Exchange.
Lear's competitors are also pursuing the same acquisition strategy.
Johnson Controls Inc., which induce a strong seating business, recently assume Interior_Department parts maker Prince Automotive, based in Holland Mich., for $1.35 billion indium cash.
Canada's Magna International Inc., nonpareil of the "Big Three" self-propelled Department_of_the_Interior firms along with Lear and Johnson Controls, recently acquired seat maker Douglas & Lomason Co. for $135 million.