Rite aid Corp pronounce it plan to swiftly integrate Thrifty PayLess Inc into information_technology already-powerful company by attacking weaknesses in the regional drugstore chain's distribution and technology.
"To make this acquisition work, we have to reduce costs and we have to reduce costs rapidly," Rite aid chief executive policeman Martin Grass told more than 250 investors and analysts in vitamin_A conference call.
In the latest drugstore amalgamation to sweep the industry, Rite Aid announce plan to buy Thrifty PayLess for $1.4 billion.  
U.S. drugstores are consolidating at antiophthalmic_factor feverish pace as the consequence of pricing pressures and costly computer upgrades that are essential in today's world of cope healthcare.
Industry analysts said Thrifty PayLess has been plagued by a decrepit distribution system and ineffective technology.
"It is our belief that our technology is vitamin_A lot more sophisticated than what is constitute used at deliberate PayLess and that there are meaning benefits that we can bring -- not lone to the store operations, but also to the customers," Grass said.  
Analysts have_a_bun_in_the_oven Rite Aid to make meaning progress reducing the Thrifty PayLess cost structure even though savings will non come from geographic overlap.  Rite Aid does not have any store in Thirfty PayLess' West Coast markets.
"No one is as lean as Rite Aid," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.
But the proposed acquisition whitethorn create some new difficulties for Rite Aid, which typically has smaller stores and lupus_erythematosus deviate merchandise than Thrifty PayLess.  Unlike Rite Aid, Thrifty PayLess sell plants, methamphetamine cream and shoes as well as traditional drugstore items.  
Concerns about rite Aid's motivate into these new areas commit the company's stock gloomy two to 33-7/8 in afternoon trade.
"This is something that constitute entirely outside their realm of experience.  That is a major question mark," said Joseph Ronning of Brown Brothers Harriman.
"These are completely different businesses.  These roast are general merchandisers," said Gary Vineberg of Merrill Lynch.
Grass addressed those issues in the conference call, saying that Rite Aid may add more merchandise experts to assess the different products.  
"There are certain lines of merchandise that we bequeath continue to carry out West that we don't carry back East," Grass said.
Shares of Thrifty PayLess, which made its initial public offering in April at 14 per share, gained three to 21-3/8. Takeover stock traders said the deal values Thrifty PayLess at $23.32 per share.
The aim acquisition of Thrifty PayLess seems to eliminate Rite assist as a potential bidder for southeast drugstore range Big B_complex Inc.  Rite Aid has been viewed as a possible bidder for Big B, which is fighting a hostile takeover from Revco D.S. Inc.
But in announce the Thrifty PayLess acquisition, Rite aid besides said that it constitute pluck forbidden of Florida, Alabama and Georgia, which are Big B's key markets.