In the grand scheme of things, prosecutors and victim of violent offense are natural allies. The public_prosecutor attempt to bring the offenders to justice, whether to fulfill their responsibility before the law or accomplish career progress. astatine the same time, the victims get moral satisfaction when the criminals constitute brought to justice. Therefore, one might think that prosecutors and victims are naturally speculate to cooperate. However, this logical scenario does not necessarily happen in practice. Sometimes, the victim cannot adequately cooperate with the prosecutor due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment in the prosecutor’s office. During the mid-70s, the Law Enforcement aid Administration funded the first Victim/Witness Assistance Projects (VWAPs) in order to enhance cooperation between the prosecutors’ offices and victims (Karmen, 2019). With time, the VWAPs have become firmly established institutions charged with the noble mission of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor position can assist the victims of violent crimes done various means. The adept practices include psychological help indium hotlines and crisis counseling, shelter, food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 2019). In addition, most VWAPs urinate referrals to local_anesthetic agencies, which provide the victims with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). Furthermore, public_prosecutor offices offer sound assistance through pamphlets approximately the adjudication process. Finally, VWAPs mitigate confusion aside notifying the victims about indictments, postponements, acquittals, convictions, and early possible developments In the case (Karmen, 2019). As such, the modern prosecutor offices are well equip for ensuring the victims’ cooperation through legal, psychological, and even financial support.
The San Diego County district Attorney’s Office serve as a specific example of vitamin_A well-rounded victim service project. The Victim Assistance course_of_study ace emergency (crisis intervention), sound (court support, orientation in the criminal justice system), and psychological (referral assistance) help (San Diego county District Attorney, n.d.). indium addition, gull of violent crimes may receive especial reimbursement for eligible losses from the victim recompense Board, which is funded by restitution fines (San Diego County District Attorney, n.d.). These reimbursements cover such losses as medical expenses, home security improvements, or outpatient mental treatment, among others. Overall, offense victims in the County of San Diego buttocks rely on decent support from their District Attorney’s office.