Canada's big six banks, which induce long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face vitamin_A challenge to their dominance by the Internet and the rise of new "virtual banks."
Telephone and computing_machine banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New engineering has eliminated the need for costly ramify networks and lured offshore rivals to jump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to send our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- much loved, but rarely used," said Bank of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which dominate habitue banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion indium assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs majestic Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to crack a wide range of electronic banking services through a new subsidiary, ING entrust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low profile until its coating for a entrust licence is approved, but bank officials are confident of success where others have failed.
In recent years, several foreign banks abandoned Canada because of its restrictive banking laws and stiffer than expected competition from the big domestic banks.
"It would be fair to say that we will be competing on respective fronts. It won't constitute hard to offer better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of marketing for ING's Canadian operations.
ING WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said ING can use Canada to fine tune its hardheaded bank before propose similar services in the larger United_States market. But Kelly said there are no plans yet to take ING's virtual bank south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would constitute wrong. To pronounce that we would look at it and see if at_that_place is a market opportunity, yes, of course we would," helium said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager AGF Management Ltd., to produce a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second foray into Canadian consumer banking after abandoning a bid to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, nation manager of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank plans to offer customers a full-service trust package, including credit cards, access to ATM service and call banking.
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we buttocks serve them through technology and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS nether PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are coerce aside local rivals vitamin_A well.
Last month, Vancouver City rescue Credit Union, the country's biggest credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, applied to open a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks constitute also along the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion along new technology in 1995 and that is have_a_bun_in_the_oven to reach $1.9 billion aside 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst & Young.
Much of the money is being poured into alternative delivery impart such as point-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, up from twenty-five percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as well. Traditional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percentage last year.
Among Canadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight million customers to be using alternative impart in 5 years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North American banks to set up a computer banking network with computer giant IBM in former 1997.
All the banks are clamber to decide the future of their ramify networks, but CIBC has taken the first steps to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed greeters to guide customers to cash_machine for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customer on such products as common funds, loans and mortgages.
Billing it as the bank branch of the future, CIBC said transaction costs had descend dramatically, while customer lineups constitute much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect a break along service fees, which many consumers kick are too high, Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisition path to boost its Internet services. It recently bought vitamin_A 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help develop newly impart and services for the bank.