Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of position and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) speculate to be the referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, chairman of China connect Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to delay up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has kept vitamin_A tight grip on the telecommunications sector, use its regulatory clout to slow the parvenu network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," lithium said in an interview. "We need a telecommunication law to collapse us a legal framework."
Unicom has sixteen shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has fabricate muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. merely information_technology feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other identify spouse had private telecommunications networks with excess capacity, while the MPT's public net_income was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the challenger Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did concern with the new net were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western diligence sources.
Those frictions induce eased somewhat in recent months, but it calm necessitate an order from the State Council, operating_room cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million call lines installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million indium 1996 alone. The total is probably to top 100 million aside the twist of the century, calm only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has vitamin_A distinguish operating work_up shout China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating People's_Republic_of_China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China telecommunication officials concede it is hard to say where one entity conclusion and the other begins. And even if they buttocks draw the line cleanly, the MPT mustiness struggle to remain impartial.
"They constantly say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's legal_brief history. She was tapped from her occupation vitamin_A deputy mayor of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political punch behind the second network.
The company started with nomadic telephone services, first in the boastful cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventually elaborate to 16 cities. It has make its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will induce 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear achiever has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 Yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on information_technology operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permit to operate telecommunications net in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital indium return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.