Canada's six boastful banks are poised for a further round of chirpy profits when they begin reporting third-quarter gain Tuesday, dress the stage for a third consecutive phonograph_record year, analysts said.
An improved interest rate picture, gamey investment trust and dealing revenues and better loan quality are expected to drive profits indium the third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big six are expected to be 15 percent to 20 percent gamey than the one-third quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I would have_a_bun_in_the_oven more sector of the banks to constitute more profitable than they were indium the match one-fourth of last year," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of nova Scotia, Canada's third- and fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick off the earnings parade along Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, home depository_financial_institution of Canada, report on Thursday.
The country's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, analyst said securities earnings should be stronger than last year. Canada's brokerage diligence is dominated aside subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit from lower loan passing as the diligence continues to bounce from disastrous loans indium commercial real estate, which collapsed in the late 1980's.
Despite the correction indium stocks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained strong performers. Lower Canadian interest rates have helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto lineage Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lower concern rates, then it probably will dress the background for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, Associate_in_Nursing analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said they do not expect any of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third straight year of record annual profits. The group call up vitamin_A combined profit of C$5.17 million indium financial 1995 ended Oct. 31, up from C$4.25 billion vitamin_A year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects vitamin_A modest increase in profits.
"Investment trust is a cyclical business. It may tail off a bit, but there constitute no sign_of_the_zodiac of a recession yet, therefore I would think we could get modestly higher earnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter net of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cents Canadian (67.9 cents) per share a year ago, according to figures supplied by the extraneous Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cents) per share indium the third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadian (62.8 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 cents Canadian (52.5 cents) per share profit, up slightly from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per share in the one-third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings are bode to rise to 41 cents Canadian (29.9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter consequence are pegged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share compare to survive year's C$1.13 ($82 cents) per share.
Royal depository_financial_institution of Canada is seen improving to ninety-six cents Canadian_River (70 cents) a share in the third quarter, up from 88 penny Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.