Sierra semiconductor_device Corp.'s stock leap_out more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge vitamin_A vitamin_A smaller merely More profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Midweek that it plan to pull out of the extremely free-enterprise modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer network equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be vitamin_A much smaller company now, but it will constitute a Thomas_More profitable business," said analyst Lamb Moosa of Oscar_Robertson Stephens & Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful shape ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its shape force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company induce announce plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write gloomy the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group articulate the company likely would have difficulty selling information_technology modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your intention to exit vitamin_A business, information_technology go a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the company is focus along the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking bit has begun to pull the attention of much-larger players such as International Business auto Corp
"As the market develops the question is, constitute they able to make that transition to be vitamin_A much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analyst were More bullish, even though the company is expected to flinch to somewhat more than half its current sizing in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht & Quist. "The modem business constitute a low-margin, trade_good business," helium said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 billion of the company's $117 million indium sales in the first one-half of the year, compare with $45 million indium sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit_of_measurement is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's lineage has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has constitute buffet by falling monetary_value and concern approximately slowing demand.