Microsoft Corp. report better-than-expected profits for the latest one-fourth Monday vitamin_A strong demand for its Windows 95 and windowpane NT computer function systems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software_program maker pronounce earnings rose 23 percent to vitamin_A phonograph_record $614 million, or 95 penny a share, in its fiscal first quarter complete in September, from $499 million, or 78 cents vitamin_A share, in the 1995 quarter. tax_income leap_out 14 percentage to $2.30 million from $2.02 billion.
The profits surpass Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a share, and shares of the software giant rise to $136.375 in after-hours trading from the earlier stopping_point of $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited impregnable adoption of the company's high end Windows National_Trust operating system.
"We transport version 4.0 of windowpane NT this quarter, and the momentum behind the product constitute outstanding," said Jeff Raikes, Group Vice President, gross_sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made the decision to assume Windows National_Trust servers and workstations in record numbers, driving 19 percent revenue growth over last quarter in the U.S. and Canada. gross_sales of Windows NT waiter grew at nearly double the rate of other operating system environments."
Microsoft's results were considered a crucial measure of its progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 95 operating system.
Industry analysts have pronounce Microsoft's sales and gain growth would slow from last year's blistering footstep of more than 46 percent merely celebrated it should go_on to benefit from higher sales of personal computer and the growing usage of windowpane 95 and Windows NT.
Microsoft foreman Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected revenues to rise sequentially complete the adjacent two quarters from the $2.3 billion reported for the quarter complete on Sept. 30.
In Associate_in_Nursing interview, Brown also said he remember the company's cost of goods deal could descent "a fiddling bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percent of tax_income just reported, already down from 16 percent a year ago.
"We'll grow a little bit in December and so a footling bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general revenue trend, and one was very pleased with the pattern of costs indium the quarter."
Brown said tax_income in the December quarter would constitute driven in depart by holiday season sales, while the adjacent quarter would get a boost from the dismissal of the company's Office 97 business application upgrade to one of its core products.