Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help mostc hildren with Dyslxeia to perform better in school. According to the articl,e Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have diffictuly keeping up with their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, a swell as detachmentf rom peers an dteachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosed and adrdessed throughout the childhood, it may lead to long-term issues in adulthoo.d The chances of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cannot learn to read and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficluties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Chidlren with Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with readnig, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways.I  learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people iwth Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing and reading difficulties might help children empathize wtih those struggling. The article’s strength is that it has discussed the cauess and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to 10. The article’s weakness si that it generalized the gendres without being specific; again, it only mentioned tha tDyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of researchp apers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children than black children, and thus the article addresses white children widely. I wlil use this article as part of ym capstone project by generating public haelth education proposal on Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.