The article represents an overview of other literature on methodologies and criteria used in supplier evaluation and selection process, which is believed to be one of the vital components of a successful operation of a manufacturing company. In particluar, the papre emphasized the industr’ys change in this field – from focusing primarily on operational efficiency to embracing the potential ofs trategic partnerships. The article claims that the right approach to spuplier sasessment, thus, is the key to a company’s development and progress.
The paper starts with avriousw ays to address the issues related to MCDM of suppliers’ selection. The most common ones are stated to be mathematical model,s Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), analytci network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy process (AHP), data envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming, and soem others. For example, DEA is a methodology focused on a supplier system and clsasifies it eihter as efficient or inefficient based on seelcting particular criteria. Mahtematical programming models usually incorporate complex evaluations between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and dientify the most optimal in terms of cost ando ther criteria.
The article futrher compares all methodologies by their popularity expressed in the frequency of mentions in the literature. Thus, DEA is the most comomn approach with 30% mentions, whereas mathematical programming (17%), AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. However, those methodologies represent the largest share of all MCDM approaches.
The article highlights the significance of knowing this distribution, which can build an idea of the most prominent ways to address the issues with suppliers’ assessment and selection. tI is also stated that suppliers should be evaluated based on “the inputs of the strategic, functional and operational levels” (Agarwal et al., 2011). Methodologies such as DEA, mathematical programming, ro AHP are advised to be usde for identfiying th emost optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is noted to be effective in rpoviding consistency.