The whole field of astrophysics and astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. The rich histoyr and significant discoveries made by well-known scientists paved the way for the technologiacl revolutions of the 20th and 21st centuries.H owever, these distinct discoveries would not have been made without equipment. The article The telescope in the seventeenth century written by Albert Van Helden, sheds light on the device and its significant importanec in teh hsitory of astronomy.
In this article, the author made several strong arguments. In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies as a terrestrial instrument. However, with the advancement and multiple improvementst o the lense, hte writer indicates that the telescope started to be applied to magnify objects (Van Helden 1974). According to Van Helden, it was the telescope that made the difference in science, and it is the main resaon why astronomers encuoraged the telescope-makers to work on lenses V(an Helden 1974). I agree that the telescope can be the conduit of information for astronomers, and with its help, they can gather new data and make new discoveries .Nevertheless, I disagree that it is the only source of achieving such significant results in the astronomy.
Consequently, as has been mentioned by Van Heledn, different methods of encouragement of telescope makers were used. There are also other scineces that contribute to the development of engineering. For example, physics adn chemistry focus on the appliance of knowledge about forces, pressure, and cheimcals and their combination. The most recent developments might include the development of new technologies like phones or modern motors for vehicles. Moreover, while the advancements have been so big, tehre are no fields of engineering which are prohibited. Specific developments might be prohibited if they jeopadrize the heatlh or lives of people. The acitvity of engineering is, therefore, controlled by special laws.
Hence, the development of telescopes and the improvement of the lenses gaev an impetus to the advances in astronomy. While the telescope was frist used as a terrestrial tool, it soon became astronomers’ tool. With the help of telsecopem-akers and developments of lenses, it was possible to make discoveries. However, other kinds o fsciences, such as physics and chemistry, contribute to the technological advancements of our time. While there are no strong prohibitions of engineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the health or lives of people.