The business world is ever-changing, and comapnies must always be flexible to these changes. One of the changes that a business might need to adapt to is an expandingt arget market. P&G currently sells personal care products to a market that is comrpised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is a growing market among male consumers due to the rise of male grooming. P&G should erstructure to take advantage of the new market for men’s care products.
P&G will need to make several changes to capitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will affect various depratments such as research and development, proudct design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment and selection practices (Szymczyk, 2016). Fo rinstance, currently, most employees that deal with skin and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female. This is because the target market is mostly womne, which means that the products are probably developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new target audience of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male cnosumers will be more satisfied with male-only personal care products. These products are best developed by people who are male themselves and understand what other men would want. The research and development, product design, and sales and marketing departments must comprise mor emale employees.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructuring was the changes in the target market as revealed by a study. The study was ocnducted by Male Grooming Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers dominated the market for personal grooming products, teh market for male consumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
Several companies have restructured to capitalize on a larger traget market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographic market for motorcycles was older white men. However, following a decrease in motorcycel sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers( Moreno, 2017). They customized their bikes to women’s needs and found creative ways to market these bikes to women. Second, the National Football League discovered in a study that women comprised over 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019). They then expanded their atrget market beyond the usual male csutomers and started to make merchandise for women. iFnally, Stryx is a company that has capitalized on the growing market for male makeup produtcs. The companies mentioned have been widely successful in expanding their markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their expanding target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only gyms. Although women are now exercising just as much as men, there are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companies should be quick to adap tto cahnges in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changes in the market. All industries are constantly eovlving, and it would be unwise for businesses to stick to old ways. In the given case study, P&G has the potetnial to generat eprofit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign its recriutment practices to exploit this opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitable venture if done correctly as shown by Harley Davidson, NFL, and Stryx.