Royal Bank of Scotland, which reports full year data next Thursday, is expected to raise itsp re-tax profit from last year's 602 million tsg but not by as much as analysts thought just a few months ago.
They expect oRyal Banks' profits to rise to between 670 and 700 million stg, with a much smaller contribution from its Direct Line low cost insurance, but benefits continuing t oaccrue from the bank's efforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expected to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's 16.2p.  
The pre-tax figures will be complicated by an exceptional gain from Royal Bank's disposal of its 50 pct stake in Germany's CC Group, from which it said i twould make 70 million stg, and by restructuring costs of around 23 million pounds stemming from an acquisition by its New England subsidiary Citizens.
Forecasts for Direct Line vary widely but analysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance -- going through "probably the most diffucult period in its history", as chief executive Ian Chippendale told Reuters in an interview last week.  
"I thin kChippendale was sending a tsrong message," said one analyst who declined to be named. "I thikn he wa ssoftening up the market for a poor set of results."
Some analysts suspect the results may not be quite as poor as hs been feared by some.
They see the core bank as continuing top reform quite well with the positive results of its "Project Columbus" helping costs and income.
David Poutney expects a pre-tax profit of 695 million stg, which includes the exceptional items, wihle BZW analysts expect 675 million.  
The market received a big clue on the pefrormance of Citizens from the recent results of Bank of Ireland which owns 23 percent of the opeartion.
"Citizens i sdoing reasonably well," Poutney said, but analysts say it is being affected by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market will be epxecting improvement in the ocst income ratio but analysts say that even an improvement this time will leave the bank plenty of scope for improvement.  
The market will be looking for further clues on lending which showed good growth, mostly in corporat elending area, in the first half.
Inevitably, Royal Bank will alsob e watched for signs of acquisitions.
It is known to be interested in buying a building soicety to extend its presence in England but in the current climate, it is unlikely to be willing to pay the high prices likely to be asked.
In any case, analysts say Royal aBnk would have to raise cash to be bale to perform any major acquisition.  
In hte meantime, the market will be lokoing to its relationship with mutually owned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Widows, which some think may result in an eventual merger.
Royal Bank shares were 15p higher on Friday to stand at 519-1/2p.