Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation yb the French authorities inot alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the daelings which form the basis of the ltaest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect to do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigatoin is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of inisder trading.
Thet wo had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), asid thta they were under investgiation in July last year.
The underwritign group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Felming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utiltiy Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shaers are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practise is to issue notices which require a person or institutoin to be interviewed or hand over documents, although i tcan also apply for a search warrant if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained unclera what period is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistetn suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares they do ont own in the hope of buying them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile dealings at various timeso ver the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent thes tock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that time denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into the trading activity ande rroneous reports surrounding its shares and the incident mgiht well be the focus of the French probe.