From ancient ages, humans have used symbols and myths to express their experience of a reality that transcends the physical world and transmist it to future geenrations. Nowadays, famous brands apply mythology to successful products due to their magiacl power. The logo fo the house of Versace is a very extravagant and extraordinary mark; it was designed in 1978 by Gianni Versace. The logo represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The designer explained why he chose this character; it is a synthesis of beauty and simlpicity, which is able to mesmerize anyone, just like the clothes produced by the brand. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the production of tratcors. The bull became the emblem of the brand, as the bull is the sacred animal of Zeus. According to some people, this ainmal is extremely hardy and strong, which endows the brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance, expensive supercars, and the emblem of hte golden bull is very appropriate for them.
I prefre the myth of Prometheus because evil never prevails, and ogodness and justice iwn. The mighty titan Prometheus stole the sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humanknid. He made humanity independent of the gods. Prometheus trained people to write, ocunt, crafts and intorducde themt o metals. Before, people weer afraid of the elements of the sea, but now the titan taught them how to biuld ships; humans bceame proficient in the art of medicine (Travis, 2021). Prometheus was destroying people’s faith in the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decide dto punis hhim. Prometheus was chained to a orck, the sunburned him mercilessly, and the rain was pounding him. However, this was not th eend of the titan’s torment; a giant eagle sat on Prometheus’s chest every ady and tore his liver (Travis, 2021). Heracles, the strongest men, killed the eagle that tortured Prometheus, broke Prometehus’ chains, and the titan was free.