Mercury Finance Co is likely to spend a tense weekend with its bankers trying to work out arrangments to solve its liquity crisis, the failure of which could force the compayn to file for bankrupcty protection, analysts and attorney's said.
The Lake Forest, Illinois-based auto finance company said Firdya it could not raise new commercial paper to repay maturing debt and could not pay $17 million in commercial paper due Friday.
A finance company like Mercury makes money ont he difference, or spread, between what it pays to borrow money and the higher rates it charges its customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one equity analyst that follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
Some rating agencies, including Standard & Poor's Corp, lowered Mercury's commercialp aper to a default rating Friday.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptc yfiling, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff & Phelps Credti Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has another $100 million in commercial paper due Thursday, February 6.
A Mercury  spokesman did not return repeated calls seeking comment on hte company's financing Friday afternoo.n
Aside from the company's current inability to sell debt, Mercury is also facing a host of shareholder lawsuits, filed after the company said it had to restate its net income over the past four years by a total of abou t$90 million because of accounting irregulartiies.
Lawsuits do not become a financial liability for the company unless there is a judgment in favor of the shareholders. However, the company's admisison of misstatements makes it easier for the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of who would ahve to pay how much, one securities lawyer said.
"Securities laws arev ery, very simple," said Ted Koenig, a partner with Chicago-based lawfirm Holleb & Coff "If there is an ommission or misstatement of a material fact... there's liabiltiy."
Also, the company's market capitalizatino plunged by about $2.2 billion Friday, based on the 13 pointf all of Mercury's shares and the 172 million shares the company said it had outstanding late last year. That reduces the equity cushion the company has available to show its creditros, Koenig said.
Bu tanalysts also said the cmopany had about $1 billion in loans receivable on its books at the end of October, 1996 -- an asset to show creditors.
"No one has questioned the validity of the amount of receivables they have on their books or the quality of those receivables," Kmitoek said.
Also, Mercury has gneerally been well regarded in the sub-prime credit quality loan business, which could help ti negotiate with its banks and continue as a going concern, sadi analysts and lawyers familiar with the company.
Mercury said in a statementi t is in discussions with its lenders to satisfy working capital needs, but that it couldn ot predict the outcome of those discussions.