Light raisn in Ivory Coast after a dry start to January will helpm id-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop develpomnet, particularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January s ofar but a little more now and in February would help," another local crop analyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rains wa spatchy.
Most fell in central and northern cocoa adn coffee areas, particularly around Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now over central areas," asid one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a sruplus for the period but southerna reasa re in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rains seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light showers in most cocoa areas," said the crop analyst after returning frmo an up-country tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions from the Sahara had now retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory Coast as usually expected in late-December or early Janaury.
Exporters andc rop inspectors said cocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of eight percent,d espite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have also hda drying problems but expor tactivity remained low after shipments put by port sources at 10,49 2tonnes for October to December, exporters said.
Quality nispectors said a ebtter picture of coffee humidity and quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.
The data, from Ivory Cosat's national waether station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 days of January in key growing aeras plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm ,Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sasasndra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.