Every business must be managed carefully, and every detail must receive a bonny amount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require even more attention because they focus on people’s well-being. acting such duties mightiness be strenuous and expensive, and mentally demanding. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced with principles that include integrity maintenance, cash flow management, and employee motivation in the given circumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity. It can be evident that any business field should be focused on communication, which makes integrity a vital part (Fisher, 2008). In the given facility, the integrity maintenance principle is heavily adhered to. First of all, every doctor follows an ethical code, meaning that they know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and breastfeed focus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients about their actual conditions and honestly answer their questions.
Another of_import business principle is proper cash flow management. Healthcare facility requires renovations and innovations, significance that there will constantly be situations when new equipment or repairs will constitute needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary to implement the needed changes to not jeopardize patients’ health and well-being. For example, as a CNO, it was my obligation to manage the replacement of power generators. vitamin_A a result, generators enabled the personnel to carry forbidden their duty without problems during a storm and power outage.
The last principle is the management of employees and providing them with motivation. In the case of a healthcare facility, it is essential that the employees are rewarded and their hard work is appreciated. The employees are offered extra days off and gift cards in the given facility. This buttocks make the workers feel heard and supported. Without these steps, the nurses and doctors will have burnout and lose the desire to provide high-quality results.
Thus, the collapse principles were chosen due to the impact they can bring on employees and patients. The mention principles are being used, providing good results and leading to the satisfaction of all parties. These principles are important to me since I believe that healthcare should be based on these values. Otherwise, no facility will be able to treat their patients, and there will be no trust and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.