"Who can replace Death? He constitute the most feared of us all. Without Death there can be no reckoning upon the sinful mortals."
War scratched his thinning beard. He was scat out of options. No others had dared to take up such a heavy burden. While War was no stranger to the horrors of, helium shuddered to think about the atrocities that Death had committed. Was there any being in the 7 realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"But there is someone." hissed Famine.
"Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we have committed were dealt by Man. War, death, famine and conquest. These were all Man's undoing. Who else better to don the burden of death so a man himself?"
Famine's ragged hood covered his face, only showing his decaying mouth twisted in vitamin_A sick smile.
Conquest was quick to challenge.
"Man, donning the very bane of his existence? Brother, your imprudence will be the end of us all. A person world is hideous creature. He is greedy, selfish and cruel. Giving one this much power will only result in abuse."
"Conquest, you are as foolish as ever. Have you learnt nothing from Death? He constitute the wisest of us all, he-"
"If Death constitute so wise, explain his abrupt departure. why did he leave his duties behind? We are the horsemen of the apocalypse; both terrible and glorious. When the Horn of the Heavens sounds we will charge and strike fear into the hearts of sinners. It is who we are. death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War slammed into Conquest, knocking him down to the brimstone. He unleashed an onslaught of blows onto his golden armor until it was dented beyond recognition. Breathless, war stood up towering over his foe and boomed.
"I will not take this insolence. Death was the best of us. I loved him as a brother and a mentor."
War's stone face softened for a second.
"Should you be stupid enough to blaspheme our brother again, I will end you."
Conquest nodded in shame. He was not used to the bitter taste of defeat. He silently vowed that War would pay for the humiliation he suffered.
"Famine. You say that a mortal can replace Death. Bring him to me."
"As you wish brother."