Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations such as safety in a healthcare system. It can be defined as the ability of an individual to inspire others to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplace incivility is among the challenges that affect the provision of quality care to patients. However, safety is a situation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enables nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards required during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes among health professionals or between patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instances of workplace incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, they should guide the followers on the right path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, a high score in the evaluation is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader displays.
Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm thatcould be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, safety is characterized by healthcare services such as diagnostic care being free from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patient readmission due to treatment going wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdly, healthcare providers should also be free from any danger and should access protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered to by both providers and patients.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. They are also required to know when and where to ask for opinions during care. Second, in safety, nurses  should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in school and the resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providers to make informed decisions during care.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
There are emerging health initiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adequate nurse staffing to eradicate stress levels that adversely impact care. Third, nurses should have conflict resolution skills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019). Finally, nurses should be educated to help eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand the effects of incivility on the performance of an organization. Nurses should know the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabling environment to provide quality healthcare services to the people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment and that patients are free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promote safety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policies and safety standards to guide operations within healthcare. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Ways to Advance Communication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way is by constantly training nurses to be effective communicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the workplace. It plays an integral role in motivating followers to achieve the set objectives. For instance, a nurse leader ensures that nurses are encouraged to achieve healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve issues such as conflict and eliminate instances of workplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety is being free from any harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role in ensuring that health providers and patients operate and stay in a safe environment.