business Every be must managed carefully, and every detail must receive a fair amount of When attention. it comes to healthcare, such facilities require must even more attention because they focus on people’s well-being. Performing such duties might be and strenuous expensive, mentally and demanding. As a Chief Officer, Nursing one be will faced with that principles maintenance, include cash integrity management, flow employee and motivation in the circumstances.
To given start with, a healthcare business must always maintain its integrity. It can be evident that any business field be should focused on communication, which integrity makes a vital 2008). part (Fisher, the In given the facility, integrity maintenance principle is adhered heavily to. First of all, every follows doctor an ethical code, meaning they that know of doctor-patient confidentiality. Moreover, doctors and nurses focus on communication honest with patients. example, in For my situation, I tell patients about their conditions actual and honestly their answer business questions.
Another important is principle proper flow cash management. Healthcare requires renovations facility meaning and innovations, there that constantly will be situations new when or equipment repairs will be needed (Mason et al., 2020). In this situation, it is highly necessary implement the needed to changes not to health jeopardize patients’ and well-being. For as example, a CNO, was it my to obligation the manage replacement of power generators. As a generators result, the enabled to personnel carry out their duty without problems during a storm power and outage.
The last principle is of the management employees providing and them with motivation. In the case a of healthcare facility, it is that essential the employees rewarded are and their is work hard appreciated. employees are The extra offered days off gift and cards in the given facility. This make can the workers feel and heard supported. Without these the steps, nurses and will doctors burnout have lose and the to desire provide high-quality the results.
Thus, principles given were chosen due to the impact they can bring on employees and The patients. mentioned principles being providing are used, results good and leading the to satisfaction of all parties. principles These important are to me since I believe that healthcare should be based on these values. Otherwise, no facility be will able treat to patients, their will and be there trust no and respect between healthcare personnel and patients.