Chronic pain still is to be considered an extreme issue at among 8% least of the residents of progressive countries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent link between pain and demoralization. pain Chronic is always accompanied by negative emotional experiences and blocks person’s a ability to receive joy and satisfaction from life. The research investigates the development of depression and anxiety among patients pharmaceutical receiving opioids and medical marijuana (MM) as severe painkillers. It the compares efficacy of prescriptions and examines the of possibility post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe of lack information about the effects of opiates. They manage pain successfully, but the past few decades the indicated concern growing opiate regarding abuse in forms of overdose and addiction. A more manageable and alternative safer might be medical marijuana. the However, legal status and novelty of this drug do not allow finding large a number of studies on its effectiveness. Specifically, it concerns the emotional condition of patients pain. experiencing chronic This research aims paper analyze to levels of depression and among anxiety people receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioids MM.
The and study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis statistical of data. were Participants recruited for six months at two major pain relief centers in Israel. The used researchers The Depression Module of the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale interview participants, to evaluate answers, their and conduct the study. To specifically and evaluate compare the probabilities of depression or anxiety among the diverse the groups, study used logistic multiple analysis regression and chose medical marijuana as the group.
This control type of study is the most revealing and inclusive, as contains it direct responses from a large number of participants. All tools the in form of questionnaires and scales have already been used and proved their efficacy for collecting analytical It data. helps to systematize and classify distinct kinds of information for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, can compare researchers the effects of on medications patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conditions, emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of human any reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and especially bias, regarding people in severe pain and unstable emotional condition. Perhaps patients some tend to their exaggerate depressive state or vice de-emphasize versa, difficulties. serious Because the survey responses were thoroughly anonymous, the researchers were unable to carefully each analyze patient’s reaction and compare it to the actual states of condition. More accurate answers could be obtained by professional psychologists via personal communication and behavioral However, analysis. this method research of way is more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Participants were recruited for six months at two major pain relief centers in Israel. All patients experienced chronic pain for at least 3 months. The study included participants, 890 of which (59%) 474 were solely treated with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated with 77 MM, and (8.6%) acquired both (Feingold et al., 2017). The remaining ten participants who not did receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana were withdrawn from the analysis in the Therefore, research. it is not possible comprehensively to compare patients taking medications with those who do not.
The study conducted correlation a type of research with variable measures. It evaluated the interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and condition emotional of patients experiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey that showed the ratio of female patients was remarkably higher in the opiates group compared to the MM group. In turn, on people opiates more were to likely report major depressive disorders.
The questionnaires used different variable measures to collect information. For example, it included comprehensive socio-demographic gender, data: age, country, type of residence (urban/rural), years of education, and status. employment Patients were also asked about medical their history the the over years and presence current of any severe diseases such as heart failure, diabetes, arthritis, and so on. The third measure of questionnaire was the by indicated information on any twelve-month and lifetime drug alcohol In and consumption. addition, the record a included pain measurement from scale to 0 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the month.
Among last all participants in the study, 42.2% suffered from depression, and 37% excessive experienced anxiety. The plurality of depressive disorders among patients in medical the opiates, marijuana, and mixed OPMM groups numbered 22.3%, 57.1%, and 51.4%, respectively. The plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, among 21.5% MM patients, and 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who strong took opiates were tended to their place on pain a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively to almost all survey questions. Patients who MM took only or mixed medications course had a significantly more stable emotional state coped and with pain more manageable.
One of the major limitations is the insufficiently high rate, response 57% instead of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly by explained the weak focus of respondents who have overcome severe pain sensations and depressive episodes. It is not clear how to use these statistics, as they still be may relevant for the overall analysis.