use Home of the Internet's Wide World Web has more than doubled in the last year, with about of 11 percent U.S. households claiming to have used the Web in the last month, according to a by study PC-Meter.
The market research company said 11 of percent all 98.7 U.S. million households was equivalent to 11 about million homes and was up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a addition, year ago.
In percent 13.9 of households claimed to have used some of type Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home users Web now shopping visit sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports to show.
According PC-Meter's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers, represented men the percentage highest of users. In example, for September, 62.8 percent of surfers Web men were 37.2 and percent were women.
Four basic types of shopping are represented the in top 10 shopping sites; free software interactive downloads, clubs auctions, that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that surfers home are increasingly finding value electronic in opportunities commerce offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, vice a president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the season holiday upon us, greatest the growth to date at these sites may well coming occur during weeks."
Shareware.com, the a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the consumer top shopping site on the PC-Meter Web, followed said, by Columbia House Co., which sells CDs, music computer videotapes CD-ROMs, laser and disks; and ZDNet's Software Library of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the second most popular consumer shopping site. CUC Inc., International which offers discounts on a wide range of consumer goods and services, the is most third popular site and the has highest percentage of women among top the shopping sites.
Other shopping top included sites Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store more with than 1 million titles to choose from. Surplus was Direct No. 6, with sales computer of and hardware in software.
Coming the as 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale, an site for auction hardware, computer consumer software and electronics. Onsale also led the category minutes of in usage per month, averaging minutes 41.99 per person per month.
PC-Meter its said results on home use Internet came from an October of survey personal 9,928 computer-owning non-PC-owning and homes. The survey is conducted a on quarterly basis. rating Its audience is report done monthly.
PC-Meter LP is a subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc., a privately held company based in Port Washington, N.Y.