Dear Diary, I know its been while a but please me. forgive Earlier today when home from walking school I a had strange, no, the strangest thing that has ever happened to me happened today I and am totally freaking out. I was crossing Squash on Creek the north bridge like I do everyday after class. But this time when I the approached on ramp I a noticed small stool sitting wooden in path. the it wasn't until I tried around walking did it I the..thing, I notice don't know what to call it a troll Yeah, maybe? a troll that makes sense. a I met troll today. At first I though it was some crude creation of some meth tweakers made of dead cats and fish but then this thing harry, scalie turned to and me gave a me grin. I so was taken I back that fell on right my ass there. If not for that I would out have been of there instantly, and the fact this that thing started to speak me.." to Easy there young-en!" it in said a disturbingly human voice "Where be you to off in such a hurry"? Naturally I answered it. I spoke to back "troll", the I must have been in shock still. "I was just trying to cross I here, do almost it every day". It was for silent a moment after that then replied "You see son, this is my bridge now"! "And you cross on it my terms". He stuck some sort of crooked cane my in face I as to started get up to feet. my "You must answer my riddle" he out choked with a laugh. This was the point where I was convinced I had gone absolutely bonkers. I literally pinched which myself only aided in his laughter. "What time is it an when elephant sits on your fence"? he said in a majestic slow voice. How was I supposed to know that? It was probably some ancient proverb or great life lesson I had never heard of..I tried reasoning with the but thing it wouldn't have any. I had to answer it..otherwise I would have to walk miles to the four other crossing. Yeah I right. sat there about for twenty minutes watching it shoo flies away I until settled had on an answer. never it told me what would happen if I was wrong in my opened reply...I my mouth to speak time when "What is it an sits elephant on fence"? your I repeated. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said confidently. trolls The face showed emotion no until he suddenly erupted in he laughter, even fell his off stupid stool. right Was I thought to I myself. I decided then that while mocks he my wrong I answer wasn't going to any take of that. I I ran ran. fast and didn't turn I'm back. Now recording it all. Should I tell my parents? What it if followed Was me? my answer right? I'm not even sure it actually happened..