Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, as such an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention help may most children with to Dyslexia better perform in According school. to the article, Learning difficulties are one of the many of consequences A Dyslexia. youngster with will Dyslexia have keeping difficulty up with classmates their in classrooms most is since reading a such fundamental ability in so many areas. In the absence of treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor behavioral such self-esteem, issues anxiety as or as anger, well as peers from detachment teachers, and parents. and When Dyslexia not is diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood, it may lead to issues long-term adulthood. in The chances children of succeeding life in are reduced if cannot they learn to read comprehend. author and explains The that Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder / may (ADHD) make Dyslexia more difficult to cure causing by difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, impulsivity. and Dyslexia Children with are likely more learning to challenges experience if their and siblings parents suffer from the same men condition.
Furthermore, are more likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic Children backgrounds. born with dyslexia with reading, struggle understanding, and spelling. article The my expands topic understanding in ways. several I learned Dyslexic that children great are empathizers; many with people Dyslexia have personality. a real writing The and reading difficulties might help empathize children with those The struggling. strength article’s is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexia with the age right bracket consideration, is, that age 4 from 10. to The article’s weakness is that it the generalized without genders being again, specific; it only that mentioned is Dyslexia more experienced often in children male compared females to the without explaining reasons. Concerning race, there is sparse a number of research regarding papers Dyslexia black among children and its Dyslexia consequences. mainly affects white children than children, thus black and the article addresses white children widely. I use will this article as my part of capstone project by generating health public proposal education on to Dyslexia prevent public the viewing from Dyslexia as a curse.