lost I my mother in stampede. the She torn was my from grasp and carried in away the flow sweaty, of mindless humanity. My nine year old mind could not process this and when my I screamed voice was drowned by out the mashing of feet and the grinding of flesh.
For a few moments I was lifted off my feet between three fat and ladies dragged around in kind a of tango, sadistic like those people on dancing with the stars.
I was carried the to toy isle spun and around in a three sixty then to the dropped floor. A large boot my crunched hand. over There was a sickening as crackle I saw my bend wrist in a way It never pulled had before.
I my arm to myself and looked in horror my at limp wrist and dangly fingers. For a few more moments, there was no Until pain. I got kicked the in shins, by skinny a teenager with brown baggy He pants. looked with down his eyes glazed that narrowed for a second as he stumbled around me. He something mumbled under his breath and then was gone in the sea Now of shoppers. my wrist my and ribs hurt, pain flared through my body and I screamed, was all it I could do.
The rushed consumers right on by. I tried to stand by up pushing up from the floor. wrist My bent backwards and my whole arm slashed was with pain. I my used legs and popped up, just in time to get bounced by large a belly with a shirt that santa said been good. I've Santa's face knocked me backward a few steps, but luckily I caught my balance at the last moment on an elderly man who was holding up than I better was, and I to tried fight the crowd towards the exit.
Being pushed and prodded severely and and injured, too short to see over the foaming I masses, somehow ended up deeper in the store. Lost in underwear the isle. Shelves were ripped being clean. A huge rufus erupted a few yards away, and a display with racks of and pants shoes was tipped over. Through chaos I the heard screams of agony and saw flashes of people several pinned under the large shelving units.
I couldn't fight it, had I no of I control where went, and the crowd carried me to closer the accident. There was blood on the floor and a black twitching man's arm my swatted from leg a under massive beam-like shelf.
Thankfully, I was whisked away from scene, the and actually spotted a small break in crowd, the I ran through opening, the headed toward the big red exit sign that is only about thirty yards away, suddenly but my progress was by halted the closing of in human bodies. I'm T.V. stuck. A smashed being carried into my wrist and I was suddenly in tears from the pain, confusion and a hysteria.
Suddenly shotgun blast echoed across the store. Then another. The was crowd quieter for a moment, and swarming the buzzing slowed down and everything seemed almost still. For about half a second. the Then screaming started. was I pushed to the and ground a fell woman top on me. of People were stepping on both us of running for the exit, running the back, for running into each other in chaos. wrist My screamed in pain, my ribs probably were broken, and I was pinned under this woman who unconscious.
The was now last thing saw I was boot a coming down on my face.