article represents The an overview of literature other on methodologies criteria and used in supplier evaluation selection and process, which is to believed be one of the components vital of successful a operation of a manufacturing particular, company. In paper the the emphasized change industry’s in – this field focusing primarily from on efficiency operational to embracing the potential of strategic partnerships. The article claims that the right approach supplier to assessment, thus, is the key to a and company’s progress.
The paper with development various starts ways to address the related to issues MCDM of suppliers’ The selection. most common ones stated are be to mathematical models, Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), analytic network process (ANP), analytic hierarchy process envelopment (AHP), data analysis (DEA), linear programming, some and For others. is example, a DEA focused on methodology a supplier system and classifies it either as efficient or inefficient based selecting on criteria. particular Mathematical programming models usually complex incorporate evaluations between suppliers, allowing one to compare them and identify the most in optimal terms of cost and other criteria.
The article further compares methodologies all their by popularity the expressed in frequency of mentions the in Thus, literature. is DEA the most common approach with 30% mentions, whereas mathematical (17%), programming AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning account for fewer mentions. those However, methodologies represent the largest of share all MCDM highlights approaches.
The article the significance of this knowing distribution, which can build an idea of the most prominent ways address to with issues the assessment suppliers’ and It selection. is also stated that suppliers be should based evaluated “the inputs on of the strategic, and operational functional levels” (Agarwal et 2011). Methodologies al., such DEA, mathematical as programming, or AHP are advised to be used for identifying the most optimal suppliers, whereas AHP is to noted be effective in providing consistency.