I knew I could not cook, but did I not sweat it. The door bell and rang, I was so excited. I the opened and door let my two gooey one eyed companions in. They were so glad that they did not even notice my baseball I bat. swung. They were mine now. All mine
The two alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves, those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commented on how strange human customs That were. was considering quite funny, what I really had planned. I laughed at them.
Three weeks later, they were strapped still their to places and woke up, ate, then slept. Jellybeans were their every waking hour. They lived jellybeans loved jelly beans, breathed jelly beans.
On their ninth week they what realized I was doing, they but powerless. were I laughed at them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now can't they complain, all so was wondrous again.
By the next they week went on a strike, jellybean but I knew that would not last considering long, how attached the to food they were.
I broke their jaws, life, their their will. They were now truly mine.
Two years just flew by, little my companions were so entertaining. But the little trick was starting to get old. I grew tired, so I decided to spice things up once again. I starved them. Then, I told them only the way to get food their was to beat one up. another winner The would eat. However, that little contest would be way too boring, so I sawed then off each of their four legs. I then them let at each other. They sprang like animals, biting punching each other. It was slow a them process, no having legs and little energy. that made But all it the more worth while. I was even of kind sad when finally the weaker the of two was knocked out. I knew I more. needed So spiced then, I things up again. I told the still barely conscience that one in order to get meal his would he have to kill his best alien friend. He shocked. was I laughed again.
So, I prepared murder the for him slowly. I handed the syringe with filled black licorice to the victorious alien. loser then The alien woke up, only awake enough to see his own friend inject the deadly dose of jelly beans into his He died body. shortly, but was boy it massively entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making inaudible noise for his jaw broken was after all. He demanded his jelly It not beans. was polite enough. His attitude was unacceptable. simply So I kicked him in the I gut. threw him against wall the and him told to be polite. HE WAS THEN HE KNOCKED OUT. NOT COULD PERFORM THE TASK OF ASKING NICELY. HE HAD BE AT TO KILLED ONCE FOR HIS MISBEHAVIOR.
Boy BRUTAL did I love that experience. But would I miss not it. a It lot of was work. Jellybeans are costly after all. ate I my dinner slowly, savoring every bite. Alien flesh tasted so good. I it knew was worth all it. Even though I could not cook well, I not knew to sweat it from the My beginning. had plan been a great success all.
Did after I write it BookWyrm17? correctly What do think you about it? I think did I it well!
r/jesuschristreddit pretty