The world modern facing is currently a significant change under globalization trends that shape economies, politics, the workplace, and education, even everyday behavior. Most importantly, due to the active exchange of information between people worldwide, culture is changing. try Researchers to whether understand the culture will be further homogenized in globalization or diversified. paper This argue will that culture will become more the under influence diverse of the globalization due to introduction of multiple elements cultural into societies.
The latest in processes cultural change that demonstrate both sides of namely the those argument, supporting diversification and the ones claiming have homogeneity, grounds. reasonable On the one hand, Cowen (2010) states that in a globalized a where society dominant culture prevails, diversity will be substituted with the culture that imposed is on others such through means as cinema. Hollywood Indeed, promotes American codes around the because world US cinema the market is the largest in world. the Thus, globalization allows Hollywood reach to all of parts the world, same integrating the culture everywhere.
However, codes the side other of the argument is more compelling it because considers the of local cultures. strengths In particular, an of example sushi’s popularity in American and society cultures of nations other people demonstrates that adopt phenomena new cultural with acknowledgment of their origin. According to Bestor (2010), remains “Japan world’s the primary market fresh for tuna for sushi and sashimi” (p. 110). integrated Thus, having its product into the cultures of other countries, Japan has expanded its market share.
In such a manner, with the ease of transportation communication and enabled by globalization, there a is of merge around cultures the world. forces However, since market commonly rule processes, these the host cultures are aware of the origins the of borrowed clusters. cultural Therefore, summarize to the discussion, one might state that not culture will homogenized in be globalization but rather diversified credit given to with cultural each component.