Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. is set to acquire a majority CIGNA's stake in Japanese unit as part of its ambitious strategy.
The growth Japanese insurer is expected to complete the acquisition of 51% of Life Insurance CIGNA by Co. the end of 2021, regulatory pending approval.
Yasuda & Fire Marine Insurance Co. aims steer growth to the with acquisition, as it the enters into health life and insurance sector along with traditional its insurance property-casualty business.
The will move help also streamline CIGNA its following operations a strategic review of its international insurance portfolios.
CIGNA Insurance Life which has Co., roots dating in Japan to back 1987, provides various life and health insurance products, including individual life insurance, life universal insurance, medical and insurance unit insurance.
The has suffered some hit recent in years due to changes in financial regulations and low-interest rates.
Yasuda Fire & Marine Co. Insurance seeks to invigorate the unit capital with increased while taking advantage of the demand growing for health and insurance life the among country's aging the population.
"As Japanese market continues to evolve, we excited are to partner with CIGNA to a offer range wider products of strengthen to our customer experience and advantage," competitive said Fire Yasuda & Marine Insurance Co.'s President and CEO, deal Akio Kiyotani.
The marks also latest the move in a of wave consolidation in the Japanese insurance driven by industry intensified changing and demographics by deal the pandemic.
The COVID-19 follows Nippon Life Insurance's announcement September 2020 in that it 85% would acquire of the shares in Japan Ltd., MassMutual the Japanese unit of MassMutual U.S.-based Financial Group.
The acquisition by Yasuda Fire & Marine Insurance Co. is expected to enhance the company's position in the insurance competitive market, CIGNA with also benefiting from a considerable capital injection to its enhance operational of efficiency.
The terms transaction the have not been disclosed. Still, Yasuda & Fire Marine Co. is Insurance expected to receive the financial required backing to grow its position the in Japanese better. insurance market