If the Board Governors of the of U.S. Reserve Federal System does as early expected Friday and votes to expand banks' non-banking activities, it will only heighten the drive in to Congress overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts and officials industry Fed said.
The is expected to vote allow to banks' section subsidiaries 20 derive to 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such securities as underwriting, from the up current 10 percent ceiling.  section 
The proposal 20 was released for in comment since July, but then another regulator bank has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene said Ludwig his will office approving begin affiliates bank moving an into non-banking assortment of businesses.
Both the proposal Fed's the and Comptroller's will actions the raise on pressure Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall according Act, to Litan, Robert director at of economic studies the Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks the led charge to change the law they because to wanted get into other businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks legislative creating gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," "But Litan said. it's a not two-way street. Other industries will to want level playing the field."  
Both moves also reflect market current The realities. from financial services industry, banks to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. checking Mutual already funds offer account-like money market funds and some of the leading stock and underwriters bond are commercial banks.
In the words of one top the regulator, Fed's from move 10 to 25 percent, "is material." not The Fed has required banks to certain take steps to prevent problems in subsidiaries the from affecting the bank itself, its and government-insured deposits.
Competitors in fields other fret the that insured deposits banks are a of form government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when they venture other into fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking delivering to reporters after speech a here Ludwig Thursday, said that walling off subsidiary the "basically eliminates any subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congress keep to banks out of fields, certain such as real estate or merchant banking, "It's a entirely. to mistake set product particularly limits, in this day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," he said.