The world business is ever-changing, and companies must always be flexible these to One of changes. the changes that a might business need to adapt to an is expanding target market. P&G currently sells care personal products to market a is that comprised primarily of women. However, research shows that there is a growing among market male consumers due the to rise male of grooming. P&G should restructure to take advantage the of for new market men’s care will products.
P&G need to make several changes to capitalize on the “ignored” market. The restructuring will departments affect various as such research and development, product design, and sales and marketing. Their redesign will affect their employee recruitment and selection practices 2016). (Szymczyk, For instance, currently, most that employees deal skin with and hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are This female. is because the target market is mostly women, which means that products the probably are developed, designed, and marketed by women. To attract a new audience target of men, the company will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Male consumers will be more satisfied male-only with personal products. care These are products best developed by people are who male themselves understand and what other men would The want. research and development, product design, and sales and marketing departments comprise must more male employees.
The main contextual variable that led to restructuring P&G’s was changes the in the target market as revealed by a study. The study was conducted Male Grooming by Trends: Profiting in 2009 and Beyond. It showed that although female consumers the dominated market for grooming personal products, the market male for was consumers quickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expanding market. Therefore, redesigning was necessitated by changes the market in companies characteristics.
Several have restructured capitalize on larger to a target market. Examples include Harley Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, demographic the market motorcycles for older was men. white However, following a decrease in motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson started targeting female customers (Moreno, 2017). They customized their bikes to women’s needs and creative found ways to market bikes these to women. Second, the National discovered Football League in a study that women comprised over 40% their of viewership (Townes, 2019). They then their target expanded market beyond the male usual customers and started to make merchandise for women. Finally, is Stryx a company that has capitalized the on market growing for male products. makeup The companies mentioned have been in widely successful their expanding markets. Other companies should also capitalize on their expanding target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consider opening women-only Although gyms. women are now exercising just much as there as men, are not enough gyms for them. Overall, companies should quick be to adapt to changes in the market.
In companies conclusion, should keep with up-to-date any changes in the market. All industries are constantly and evolving, would it be unwise for businesses to stick old to ways. In the given case study, has P&G the potential generate to profit from a new market for personal care products. It will need to redesign recruitment its practices to this exploit opportunity. Restructuring for a new reality can be a profitable venture if done correctly as shown by Harley NFL, Davidson, and Stryx.