These days never get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's when get to I rest. It's when the goes sun down that things start to bother me.
You see that above kid me? Cute kid, good with his parents, and never causes any problems. I've seen him outgrow his crib move and into this racecar bed with flames down the It's side. a upgrade good from the cramped space under the let me crib, tell ya. I haven't seen the kid much outside of this room; the truth is I'm not allowed anywhere else. Boss's rules, his. not don't I mind though, the view is good and I can everything hear in small this house which makes me feel like part I'm of the family.
I like to think he turned out since alright he such gets good at rest night, but I wouldn't want to take much too credit. be To honest, I've never met actually the kid. When he moved first into the new bed, father his was in here just before the lights went out. For what seemed like months the would father in come and listen to the boy talk about his of fear me, the He Boogeyman. would come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights go out, but everything is fine."
To which the boy would say "But dad I know in he's here".
"It's just your playing mind with games I you. knew we shouldn't have let you watch the movies with mom and I last Halloween." The dad said jokingly a with smile his on face.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't ready to be a big boy so he shouted
"No way dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Remember it's just like any other The night." said dad he as turned out the lights and shut the door behind him.
Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid can be scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried to come out and say hi a few times before, but every time this hears kid the slightest noise I can sense he gets worried. So stick I here down and haven't moved since. that Not I get much spare time to even come out, but day one would be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough part of town. It's your town not ordinary with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. As of a fact, matter no one in Taylor's world knows my world exists. even Sure, everyone around seems get to along, but at night the real creeps come These out. guys like to cause problems and they can do that to each other. I wish they would keep it amongst other the monsters, but they don't. It's they when start seeking the small ones for extra an rush that boils my blood and I step see these in.
You guys night after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call them kids; call they them "dessert" … sickos.. Luckily, real for the little ones they've each been assigned own "Boogeyman" their to make they sure stay safe and don't get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor what knew fighting these bastards was like. got You've Aeran with his scaled skin claws and the length of a car. cable How about Zeila spiked with arms that like burn hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice my size. Don't want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's but small, lightening fast with a ferocious bite. always It's the small ones that give you the trouble. most Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line of work. I'm fortunate enough can I heal fast. If I wasn't trained for these guys then I would have problems by and problem mean dead. I And with me dead that means the creeps win and would have they their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in a nights love work.
I my I job, really do. Might sound weird after hearing every that night I'm busy beating up the bad but guys, hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is what keeps me going. just I wish the kid the truth. knew All those noises Taylor in hears night the are just me my doing job. Making sure stays Taylor warm and asleep in his bed. And for that, I'm the one he worries about. I would love to actually meet one of these I kids get to watch but over, it hasn't yet. happened isn't Taylor my first and won't be my last, I but still hope. have run, Gotta I hear can the chattering of on claws pavement the heading my way. Sleep tight Taylor…