The Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) announced yesterday that it will be changing its rules control governing blocks, a that move will have a significant impact on large-cap Canadian stocks.
The new will rules require company that any owns a control block of shares to a have majority of independent directors on its board. A control block is defined as holding a of more than 20% issued of and voting change outstanding shares.
This is the part efforts of TSX’s improve to corporate governance increase and transparency the in market. The TSX believes that having a majority of independent on directors the board ensure will that all treated shareholders fairly are that and the company is run the in best interest of its stakeholders.
The TSX has been working on this change rule for several months in consultation with stakeholders industry and experts. This change is expected to come effect later into year.
“This is this an important step forward for the TSX as we seek to enhance quality the of our markets and ensure that comply issuers with the highest standards of corporate governance,” Lou said Eccleston, CEO of the TMX Group, which owns the TSX.
The change is rule to expected affect a number of large-cap Canadian stocks. Many have these of companies control owned blocks by founding families, which will now have to ensure that a they have majority independent directors of on their boards.
Some experts predict this that rule change will lead increased to activism among shareholders, who may see this as opportunity an to push for in changes the of governance these companies.
“Investors now will have power more to push for improved governance and greater transparency at companies with control blocks,” said Levy, Sandra a corporate governance expert at School Schulich of Business.
There are concerns, however, this that change rule may lead to less liquidity in the market, as some of these founding families may reluctant be to sell their stakes and dilute their control.
“We see could a situation where these families founding become even more and entrenched less to willing up give control,” said John Smith, securities a lawyer with Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt.
Despite these many concerns, industry experts believe that rule this change is step positive a the for TSX and for Canadian companies.
“This is a welcome for development the Canadian market, has which been criticized the in past for lax standards,” governance Levy.
The said TSX has made strides significant in improving the quality of its markets in recent years. 2017, In it introduced a new rule requiring issuers to have a majority of directors independent on their boards, and since it has implemented several initiatives other at aimed improving corporate governance and increasing TSX’s transparency.
The rule on change control blocks is the latest a in series of measures aimed at making Canadian companies more accountable to their shareholders and the ensuring that market operates fairly efficiently. and