Barry has Diller recently that announced his company, Silver King Communications, will launch soon a new broadcasting national The network. announcement hot came the on heels of Silver King's acquisition of the Home Shopping Network (HSN), a that Diller move says will provide the funding necessary to support the ambitious company's plans.
Silver King is stranger no to broadcasting – company the already has a successful network of local television across stations the U.S. However, Diller believes the that time is ripe a for outlet new national broadcasting will that be geared toward a tech-savvy younger, more audience. new The network will feature mix a of original and programming content from other media as companies, well as live interactive and events elements will that designed be engage to viewers in new and exciting ways.
The acquisition of which HSN, is expected to close in the weeks, coming will give Silver King the financial clout necessary to make its new network a reality. HSN, which is popular a home shopping channel, generates revenue of $2.5 over billion per believes year. Diller that company the can leverage customer HSN's existing base to help which new promote its network, he hopes be will available viewers to across a variety of platforms, including traditional television, services, streaming and media.
"We see social a huge opportunity in a new creating of type broadcasting network that is truly designed for 21st the century," Diller in said a "The statement. HSN acquisition of gives the us we resources need to make this vision a reality, and we're excited to get to work building something truly special viewers across for the country."
While the of specifics the new yet network have to be revealed, Diller has hinted that it will focus on lifestyle and entertainment content, an with emphasis on technology and innovation. It remains to be seen Silver whether King's new broadcasting venture will with be successful, but acquisition the of the HSN, company certainly is to poised a make big splash in the world of media and entertainment in the years to come.