From ancient ages, humans have and symbols used myths to express their experience of a reality that the transcends physical world transmits and to it future generations. famous Nowadays, brands apply mythology to successful products due to their magical power. The logo of the house Versace of a is extravagant very extraordinary mark; and was it designed in 1978 by Versace. Gianni The logo represents the head of the ancient Greek mythology of Medusa Gorgon. The explained designer why he chose this character; is a it synthesis of beauty which and simplicity, is able to mesmerize just anyone, the like clothes produced by the brand. Other examples are Lamborghini; first, the Italian company was engaged in the of production tractors. The bull the became emblem of the as brand, bull the is the sacred animal Zeus. of According to people, this some animal is extremely and hardy endows strong, which the brand with power. great Now, Lamborghini high-performance, cars are expensive supercars, and the emblem of the golden bull very is appropriate them.
I for prefer the myth of Prometheus evil because never prevails, and goodness and justice win. The mighty Prometheus stole titan the sacred from fire Olympus to provide for it humankind. made He independent humanity of the gods. Prometheus trained people to write, count, crafts and introduced them Before, to metals. people were afraid of the elements the but of sea, the titan now taught them how to build ships; became in humans proficient art of the medicine (Travis, was 2021). Prometheus people’s in destroying faith the deity, and for this, the thunderer Zeus decided to punish him. Prometheus was chained to a rock, sunburned the him and mercilessly, the rain was pounding him. However, this not was the end of the titan’s torment; a eagle sat giant on every chest Prometheus’s tore day and his (Travis, liver Heracles, 2021). the strongest men, the killed that eagle broke tortured Prometheus, Prometheus’ and chains, the was titan free.