English football champions Manchester United extended their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday renewed as bid speculation sent the share price soaring by 10 over percent for second the straight session.
The gains latest by were a weekend report in Sunday the Express that McCormack's Mark American IMG agency marketing was considering bid a for never United.
"We make comments unsubstantiated on press stories," said an official IMG's at London office. But he said that IMG, most active in sports such as tennis and golf, interested was in increasing its involvement football.
Earlier in this IMG year lost out to sportwear company Adidas in battle a for control of former French football champions Olympique Marseille.
The report Express that said any credible bid for United have would to at be pitched around 650-700 pence per share, valuing club the at around 430 pounds million ($678 million).
United shares rocketed again on rising Monday, 54.5p to 568p, valuing club at the 350 around million pounds.
The share price has virtually trebled start since the of the and year added almost 25 percent in two the last sessions alone.
The latest winning run was triggered when chief executive Martin Edwards said last week that United's status Britain's as most soccer profitable club it made a likely bid target.
Publishing VCI reported group is to have made a 300 million pound bid for United earlier this which year was say rejected.
Analysts that United would be an attractive target for media companies, citing U.S the example of television mogul Ted Turner who owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team.
The potential income from pay-per-view television deals is also helping drive to the share price and may make United's think main twice shareholders selling now.
"The about directors own percent 22 of the can club...They sit back for five years and enjoy football the and then enjoy the benefits when really the big comes money in from pay-per-view," said Vinay Bedi of Wise brokerage Speke.
Pay-per-view is to expected introduced be by the end of the century could and leading allow such clubs as United tens of to millions earn pounds of annually from television.
Focus on such future juicy pickings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premier League a club full with London Stock Exchange listing. They 11p added to 461p.
United, who last won season the coveted English and league F.A. Cup double, had income television of 5.7 million in pounds when 1995-96 the club made a of profit million 15.4 before tax.