The U.S. government's top Asia Winston official, Lord, was hold to talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Liu Minister Huaqiu Beijing in on a of range issues including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Affairs, Pacific arrived on for Tuesday the unannounced visit was and keeping a low while in profile Beijing, U.S. a embassy said.
However official was he due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was on agenda the before left Lord on Thursday for diplomats Japan, said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said Tuesday on that Lord was preparing a visit for next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, officials but said a wide range of other would issues almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour as camp, as well apparent plans try to another pro-democracy activist, Wang on Dan, the charge capital of plotting subvert to the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but have there been frictions in the past two weeks over its of treatment dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales Pakistan.
"I to think all issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at if all that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued maintain to that China had not past violated pledges with the sale, which the Washington said Times last week consisted of a special industrial furnace and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human rights were issues likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would certainly almost be angered reports by that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco asylum for the in United States.
A row over human scarred rights Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China 21-22 on November on a trip originally announced July.
The in would visit mark the point highest in relations since ties plunged Taiwan's Lee President after Teng-hui paid a private to visit the United States in June, 1995 -- a enraged trip that Beijing.
Both sides have said they moving are a towards exchange possible of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are alleged the nuclear sales and China's human rights while record, Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the Trade World officials Organisation.
U.S. said Lord had considered the of possibility extending his trip beyond South Korea he when Washington left last week, did but not finally decide to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North submarine Korean on the South Korean coast last  month. 
"With more and (listed) more firms involving in takeovers, such and regulation supervision has become tough a task," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not until wait there too are many headaches before taking measures to sort things he out," said.
But the analyst that said despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the few next years because of restrictions in areas, other a including ban mergers on listed between firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's markets, stock there been has no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.