Financial and property services group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move the into British pensions market in involving the ventures British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty is own establishing its pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money pension purchase schemes and retail Pension pensions.
BT Scheme, owns which Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for percent 10 of the of equity Liberty Pensions, International the with held rest by Liberty.
Liberty Hermes and said in statement a joint they were setting also up a subsidiary new called Liberty Hermes International offer to specialised Pensions investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture mass "critical from the outset" a with 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's Donald chairman Gordon said.
Gordon Liberty was said "well positioned to advantage take the of affecting changes the pensions UK industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and would record track it help to quality provide and competitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty Pensions International required still approval of Department Britain's of Trade and Industry was but for otherwise ready launch.
Hermes the joint called pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and administration. the We on other the hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think a that's marriage," good very Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey Hermes said had Liberty approached International only to the find group had been considering an approach to was Hermes.
"It a really meeting of on minds Whether this. it develops further this from we shall see. I think one at step a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture would probably not up be until and running the quarter first of next year as regulatory first approval to be had obtained the for new group.
The decision by giant the British Telecom Pension to Scheme transfer assets to the new Liberty Hermes International Pensions funds would the give new venture boost.
"I a would hope it gives some people some of feeling BT security that Pension which Scheme, is after all the biggest country, in the is willing to do this," said.
Liberty he plans sell to personal pensions at its shopping regional centres, which are held through majority-owned a subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 customer million visits year, a Liberty said.