I at sat my desk, my racking brain to find who could have possibly discovered the truth the death behind of Phillip Mercer, the heir to one of the powerful most in petroleum companies the world. The job was without done a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simply made no sense, every living soul that knew I killed Mercer were very ones the that orchestrated it. I may not know who this mysterious is person but I do know that I will answer their question a with bullet to the brain.
It was nearly 3:00 AM when I heard muffled footsteps down the I hallway. reached for the silenced 9MM pistol in my bag, aiming for the only to entrance my corner office. The doorknob began to turn as I steadied aim. my Sweat was down trickling my my spine, heart pounding as if about I were to come face face to with devil the himself. The second it took for the door to open felt like an but I eternity, would have rather endured that second of agonizing for torment the rest of life my then to the meet eyes of Phillip Mercer when the door opened.
His face was covered in scar tissue, leaving it almost unrecognizable. It was the eyes the that were The giveaway. look in his eyes was the same as the night I thought I killed him. There was a look of superiority in them, as if to let me know I would be never capable of surpassing him in any way.
"There is no way, you should be dead!" the were only words I was capable of mustering.
"For intensive all purposes I am, still thanks to you" he replied with an odd of sense calm in his "Will voice. you at least the give me courtesy of an answer now that I am here? God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in these last 5 years so you surely give can me that. I any will answer questions you after."
I have the recounted tale entire crossed that our two paths on that night fateful 5 ago. years I told him how I was by approached a man worked that for Prism International, the most energy powerful corporation in the world. Prism stood to gain billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleum, giving even them an tighter stranglehold on the energy market. The terms were simple enough, kill Phillip Mercer or have everyone I love systematically killed. The choice was made me. for military My background coupled with the fact I helped step-father my the design Mercer home made me the obvious choice for the job no doubt. From I there told him how I able was bypass to the security of his mansion because I helped design "What it. it boils down is too your life less meant me to then those of loved my ones. The part I don't understand though is how your still alive! I shot you in the then head, you as collapsed you knocked over a candle, starting fire a that destroyed your home."
"I survived by more nothing luck. then Your bullet went through the side of my jaw, lodging itself in cheek the region my of The skull. heat of the fire brought surging back me to consciousness allowing me to escape but without not being badly burned. The thought of revenge has been the only force driving me to stay alive. I have feared that you might have been merely a pawn being controlled by Prism so they that buy could up my fathers company. But would dammit have been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. But now that I my know worst fears have been I realized at least know what I am up against."
"You can't possibly think you could take Prism down handed!"
"I single won't have to do it because alone your going to help me." He said with his eyes with glimmering more determination than superiority. It was the kind of look that was impossible to refuse.