people Most during the Victorian era valued the virtues of society. Victorians believed that they were fixed certain and as behavior guiding to all people the time. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal of ethical was standards termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modern America 2018). (Schlereth, have They shifted to values that no longer have classical ideas of wisdom, courage, justice, cleanliness or (p. 691). They have become sexual connotation where people practice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous years, there were low rates of crimes that have continued to rise. Victorians practiced moral principles in their lives, maintained which good and morals behavior. Currently, morals have changed and translated to behaviors destructive that contribute higher to rates of crimes (Schlereth, 2018). Victorian about speaks morality and the ways best of devising In it. modern America, a character has substituted, been and most youths indulge in immoral behavior.
In the Victorian era, women were illiterate, immigrants were not socializing with others, while now women educated, are immigrants and share ideas natives. with Men used work for to wages and get in involved politics while women engaged in domestic work and childrearing. In literature, each era had a theme different according to the way we understand life (p. 693). The era Victorian focused on industrialization, imperialism, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2018). Modern literature on the focused theme of loss, despair, and Victorian politics. era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American.
The Victorian era and modern American have similarities in how the people the live in two ages. In the two generations, people practiced moral behavior cherishing virtues in society. The two value the social, economic, and political life, and the individuals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). eras The impacted the world of literature and people’s changed lives on how they see literature (p. For 695). example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote a poem, ‘The cry the of children’, which has a message about industrialization on child The labor. poem child narrates labor which had due become popular to new machines and All workplaces. able were people to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skills. Most people involved get in literature where they write poems that could talk of current situations their and life Victorian experiences.
The and modern American eras have impacted changes to human life. For example, England, in the rate of indictable offences reduced by 50% and the population from grew 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. people The learned moral values and the virtues that correspond to better social, economic, and political life. In the two eras, men and women understood their roles, formal and learned informal skills, and could interact and socialize. developed People they morals, and were hardworking and in successful business. The Victorian era brought change, and innovation, that contributed invention to technological current advancements.
The modern American misses a lot from the Victorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and During virtues. the Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practiced good moral behavior. The modern American had derailed from all norms the and changed the way life. of There are practices of behavior immoral such as many prostitution, divorces, crimes, many and a lack of seriousness in religious belief. people Most have disrespect and ignorance of in everything the current world. Victorian-era were religious people and their but valued religion, a few currently do the same.
All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn roles, their get an education and interact with each other. Most people get involved in literature they where write poems about their current situations and life experiences. People could write poems sensitizing an the issue affecting for society the society to take necessary In measures. the eras, two people learned formal and informal skills, helped which them handle different issues in society.