Learning history helps people draw connections between the and past and present allows making predictions the for based future on previous lessons. Climate change is one of the most significant topics of interest research. and No matter how well societies develop in terms of technology, they face will inevitably if disasters the they neglect of issues nature. Chornobyl The nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, one was the of devastating most ecological events that changed the fates of thousands of in people many countries.
My prior knowledge the of topic is not but ample, I know that do the release major radioactive of materials occurred, which led to the contamination of air water, causing numerous and diseases and deaths. I have also read somewhere that the then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosion a secret, prevented which people from saving their lives within first the few hours and days after the Unfortunately, accident. individuals living next to the nuclear plant, as well as living those farther, no had chance of survival. led The accident to the increase in radiation levels to ten “between and one hundred times normal” (Price, 2021, para. 1). I also have read about the courageousness and self-sacrifice of those who were involved in extinguishing fire processes.
I would like learn to more about the led reasons that such to a disaster and find to it out whether was Also, preventable. I want to investigate the reasons behind the decision of the USSR government to conceal the and truth let not people save their lives. I cannot understand how they could have been silent at a time when thousands of citizens were being gradually driven into an trap.
The ecological values, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the one hand, I am that concerned catastrophes such occur can and harm people’s On lives. the hand, other I am deeply disturbed by the that the fact authorities can act so and thoughtlessly dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe world that leaders should do everything to prevent possible disasters such or at least conceal not them.
My opinion about the topic is that should people learn from such disasters and use this lesson devastating in the future. However, my perspective is very closely connected to the current world situation. The relevant events happening Russia’s due invasion to of Ukraine are alarming. In the context of topic, my I should note that a few days Russians ago, attacked Ukraine’s nuclear Zaporizhzhia which plant, is the largest in Europe (Borger & Henley, 2022). Whereas the very of the question invasion Russian of is Ukraine tragic highly and relevant, I will on focus the nuclear in plants’ seizure this paper. Russians seized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize aftermath what explosions there could bring.
Sadly, seems it that history has not some taught people anything. After so many deaths in 1986 and following years, one could think that of countries the had world value learned the of people’s health and lives. That is why I want to investigate the topic of nuclear the Chornobyl accident. This way, will I able be to learn more about that disaster and draw on conclusions the present-day threats and the need for measures preventive to stop the possibility its of repetition.