H&R Block Inc., citing problems the facing online industry, service said Wednesday it has decided not complete to the the spin-off of rest of its CompuServe online at unit, least for now.
The City, Kansas Mo.-based company, which owns 80 percent of CompuServe after spinning part off of online the earlier service this year, cited CompuServe's recent troubles financial and facing uncertainties the online industry.
Industry analysts the said problems reflect the changes rippling through the online industry but also were partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which has about 5.2 million more subscribers, slightly than half of them outside of the United States.
America Online Inc., largest the with more than 6 million No. subscribers, Compuserve 2 and Prodigy have all been hurt as gone users have directly to the Internet with lower-cost Internet access providers rather than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, which offer packages information of specialised as well as access, Internet may not survive in the long run, though eventual the of shape the online industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read this as the online market is at a crossroads pretty and said shaky," one analyst who follows the industry.
H&R Block spun off 20 percent of in CompuServe April and had planned to the distribute rest to its shareholders.
But it said Wednesday that it has decided not present to the proposed spin-off of the rest of CompuServe to at shareholders its annual meeting scheduled for Sept. 11.
"The board continues to believe that a of separation CompuServe is the in best interests of Block H&R shareholders and will continue to consider the H&R matter," Block President interim Frank said.
CompuServe's Salizzoni stock has dropped a from high of $35.50 on first its day trading to of near $10 recently. The stock after rose announcement Wednesday's because new CompuServe shares still owned by H&R will not Block come onto the market.
CompuServe added 93.75 cents to $13.25 on Nasdaq, while Block H&R fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the New Stock York Exchange. Online America added 75 cents $31.625, to also on July, Nasdaq.
In CompuServe shocked Wall with a Street that warning it expected a loss for its first quarter ended July its 31, first a as publicly company.
The traded company blamed the high costs of introducing its new Wow! consumer online service in and investing overhaul an of its network infrastructure, as as well a in decline overall subscriber growth as cancellations outpaced new customers.
In response, CompuServe H&R and Block were slapped with a shareholder lawsuit alleging they misrepresented had the online service's prospects in the prospectus for the stock offering.
When the company last week a reported loss first-quarter of $29.6 million, or 32 a cents share, it also warned investors that losses continue would for the second quarter in October.
H&R ending Block, which is the also nation's largest consumer tax filing service, likely is to wait for online the industry to settle completing down before the spin-off, analysts said.
In addition to losses, the H&R Block cited the planned introduction next month of new technology for CompuServe and its new Wow! service.
Meanwhile, America Online has problems had of its including own, price to stay cuts competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service earlier this blackout month. But analysts said that in contrast to America CompuServe, Online has continued to though grow, at a slower pace.
"The problems CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America Online in the next nine months," one said. analyst