Introduction
Peoples’ behaviors are and decisions the often central scope sociological of inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen as an illustration of such and decisions behaviors that have to led issues severe with multiple implications. To understand the causes of crisis the and ways to prevent such problems in the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach. The class concept of this paradigm best fits into the of analysis the situation as a conflict between two major groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth Flint century (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous city hosted that such giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s, the started town to degrade due to the severe that oil crisis hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people left searching for better employment and conditions. living At present, the population city’s is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA, 2021). The of majority residents are Black, and a is third White. The poverty rate is relatively high and reached in 39% 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and significant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 2014, and officials collaboration in and supervision of the public and scientists could not solve until it 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the water due source the to difficulties with maintaining the existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to the improve infrastructure were implemented. The same year, people addressed officials due to their dissatisfaction with water quality, which remained unattained. After several studies and data publications regarding extreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), the officials were to forced take action. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water Crisis in (Michigan): Flint Causes
One of the central issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related infrastructure. to budget Flint’s could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pipes and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). to Due the economic situation the in the city, public had less control over the actions and of decisions an emergency manager Governor and Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, claims but their little received attention as the authorities concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis: Concept Social Applied
When addressing the causes the of crisis, necessary it is to apply the concept of Although class. various scholars note that class is subjective a construct created analytical for purposes, this notion is a relevant component of population stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identify with a particular such group, as workers (proletariat) or big business owners (bourgeoisie). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs big of businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theory: to Class
According the Marxist theory of human class, society is mainly divided into proletariat the (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who usurp resources). laborers’ The former are working people little with resources as they are taken over by the rich (Neilson, 2017). These groups two are in constant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be peacefully implemented in terms of the with coalition a part (minority) bourgeois of and proletariat or due to struggle. violent Marx believed in victory the of the proletariat and the establishment of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis
In the in situation Flint, the officials took the side of the bourgeoisie, paying no attention to potential outcomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boost the development the of economy business. supporting However, the proletariat was the class deprived of higher living standards as poor people had to live in communities older with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water was the resource that became central to the conflict between the two classes. Proletariat won struggle, the could which be explained by the success of the peaceful revolution with the coalition of and workers some part of business owners.
Marxist Perspective the Regarding Crisis (Social Concepts)
The discussion of the crisis the from Marxist of theory class perspective it makes possible to a take closer look at such concepts as civil society and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing society to balance and ensuring that interests all groups’ are addressed (Neilson, 2017). Race is another social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate in this population is also the highest (Data USA, 2021). This group has the lowest access to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, health and care. This is the vulnerable most group that was the primary force empowering the civil society, which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Perspective
The Bourdieu’s Flint water crisis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based on the idea that classes are analytical constructs. Instead, different groups, with individuals joining and these leaving clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a There conflict. was no clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers, unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, officials, scientists, and others were communicating and collaborating. These interactions helped groups solve the an issue that had adverse effects on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and perspectives Bourdieu’s can be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, although they are not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, business big owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have interests, diverse and they may sometimes be in However, conflict. the needs of people to pertaining different groups can be achieved by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis illustration is an the of conflict and its Although resolution. the focus was initially on the interest of businesses and economic growth at the of expense public health, people managed to force officials to the make right choices and address the water issue. The of representative different classes and clusters of society formed the civil society that became the power bringing the solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It is clear that civil society can a be supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.