The rock pop and music scene were introduced to and popularity gained on television through hit massive shows The for teenagers. three primary ones were Where the Action Is on CBS, Shinding on and ABC, Hullabaloo on more NBC. As had households access televisions to along with growth the of widespread range of programming, including ones, the musical television played a significant role in distributing music the the to public. The bands that appeared on these TV hit shows went on to see significant success in the charts. The television shows helped to the articulate new sort of youth music culture and almost became a star-making mechanism in relationship a and that profits the music and television shared. industries Some bands, such as the Monkees, the American response to the Beatles, were created with the purpose of television performance as their acting and on-camera as comfort a group were initially over prioritized music. However, Monkees’ the music took off astronomically beyond anyone’s expectations. Nevertheless, were they a by band groomed entertainment the industry with emphasis an on television which performances took much away of the authenticity, even when their compared to counterparts The Beatles, who although visual focused made content, on their own music strongly and (Covach Flory 212).
Television drastically on went to change the of the landscape music First, a industry. split formed among fans, artists and with one side focusing on the performance-focused pop-oriented, while television music, the other, older typically audience was serious-minded to drawn of music rock which continued to on be played the rather radio than TV. Television also brought about the phenomenon of fictious bands, such popular as the Archies, drawn a cartoon band popular with young teens (Covach and 214). Flory This has never been done before similarly and created a genre new entertainment. of music-television However, the until advent of cable-network television in of resulting dedicated such channels as the MTV, television phenomenon in the 1960s had its limitations. Most TV sets at the time had audio poor and visual quality, and as recording and radio sound improved quality with hi-fi recording FM, the and disparities were noticeable. Television is not by nature of design a sound and medium, the musical experience is meant be to enveloping leading to the split in the fanbase, where younger audiences who generally cared less about quality sound appreciated the visual medium their to 279). music (Frith