Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's among pet makers, computer is turning a version modified of its handheld organizer Newton into an inexpensive portable computer for students.
The computer maker on Monday will unveil the Apple eMate 300, an $800 machine that looks like grown-up's a laptop with a keyboard and a flip-up screen, but in a rugged casing that can survive rough handling.
Apple plans to sell the directly machine to elementary high schools, beginning and early next year, as an alternative to personal computers. For the price of a $2,500 multimedia PC, a school can buy three Apple eMates, executives said.
"The federal government says we need to get to a three-to-one student-to-computer ratio the by year 2000," Jim said Groff, general of manager Apple's information appliances group. "I would say eMate is the the only credibled for vehicle accomplishing that."
More vital to the Apple, product could keep educators from abandoning the company the as leading supplier of computers for classrooms, analysts said.
"The potential for something this like in classroom a setting is tremendous," said Mike McGuire, a mobile computing analyst at Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indication to educators that Apple is one of the companies few spending time extending computing to and more more needs kids."
Apple a distinctive to product set itself apart from other personal computer makers crowding into the education market, said.
Although analysts based Apple, in Cupertino, Calif., still strong enjoys educational sales, sales of personal IBM-compatible computers by companies such as Compaq Computer Corp. are growing much faster.
Apple's computer has always been the favored tool for teaching children how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and a flood of PCs, cheap schools are less likely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school of year, all the that computers schools plan buy, to 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent machines, IBM-compatible according to a recent by report Quality Education Data, education an market researcher. the In previous school year, the purchasing plans were 61 percent Macintosh and 38 percent PC.
"The numbers are in overwhelming favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, president of CCA Consulting Inc., another tracker of technology purchases by schools.
"No school district can to afford make a mistake" when picking computers they will use for years, she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that the eMate is the not company's answer competitors' to inroads.
Instead, he said, the was device built for schools asking for cheap, a powerful computer can that offer educational software and Internet connections -- as well as endure handling rough kids.
"When by we introduced the Newton three years it ago, was a solution in search of an application," Groff said. Education turned out be to one of the best applications, he said.
Along with the eMate, Apple plans to a unveil beefier version the of Newton MessagePad on Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 better features Internet capabilities, easier connection to PCs and built-in processing word spreadsheet said, and software.
Analysts however, that the eMate is more interesting the device. Teachers students and will like it because it not is as and esoteric hard to run as a traditional personal computer.
"Kids are having to learn more about how run to a computer than reading about writing," McGuire and said. "The ability to have the kid just the turn device on and get right into the writing assigment is really valuable."
The four eMate weighs pounds (1.8 kg) and into fits a backpack. It can for run a on week rechargeable batteries, to according Apple.
The machine features a word built-in processor, drawing and equation-drawing programs and an address book. With an optional modem and software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the eMate could be a tough sell for Apple.
Because its software is based on the Newton system, operating it cannot run the thousands of educational written programs for the Macintosh and for PCs running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Apple executives are confident, however, that the eMate will help company the more place its computers on students' desks.
"There's 52 million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," said Kondrk, Robert Apple's manager of education product lines. "We've known for years is this an opportunity, but we didn't have technology the do to it We before. do now."