Markets, NatWest the investment banking of arm National Westminster Bank, on Monday named Peter Hall as the to man run its expanding operations questions but over other the bank's strategy remained, analysts said.
NatWest Hall, said currently who runs its American operations, would take as over chief operating officer the of investment bank, reporting to chief Martin executive Owen.
At the same time, NatWest said Markets would it streamline and origination distribution functions one into Global Markets Financial division from the current capital and markets treasury divisions.
NatWest no said job losses result would from the consolidation.
The bank has been on acquisition the trail recently, buying corporate finance boutique J O Hambro Magan October, in spending $590 million on U.S. primary dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 million pounds on the Gartmore, British fund manager. also It acquired U.S. acquisitions merger and specialist Gleacher million.
But $135 for analysts have expressed NatWest concern that will find it to difficult these bring together, all the despite fact that the businesses seem to compliment each other.
Some feel that NatWest is spending large of amounts cash on buying that businesses could be near the of top their business NatWest cycle.
"The markets business is robust and it can make returns while it is still building," said one "But a analyst. revenue downturn tend will to hit players the who are building rather than who those already are established."
Currently, investment banks are generally the enjoying low-inflation, steady growth conditions seen in major many with economies an accompanying healthy amount of mergers and acquisitions activity.
But a substantial downturn on Wall predicted Street, by strategists, many could leave some looking high-cost acquisitions little a appetizing, less analysts say.
Owen said the of fast growth NatWest markets, both organically by and acquisition, led had him to conclusion the that day-to-day the management operational should be separated from client strategy, development and financial supervision.
"As President and Peter COO, will be charged with implementing our operational plan, leaving more me time with to work global to product heads shape our strategies," Owen said.
Analysts were that happy NatWest had an insider brought to the job.
"Sometimes it gets to difficult keep continuity and can start things to fall said apart," one analyst. "I would class this appointment as continuity, that's so good."