Microsoft Corp. better-than-expected reported profits for the latest quarter Monday strong as for demand its Windows 95 and Windows computer operating NT helped systems fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker earnings said rose 23 percent to a record million, $614 or cents 95 a in share, fiscal its first ended quarter in $499 September, million, from or 78 cents share, in a the 1995 quarter. Revenues jumped 14 percent to $2.30 billion from $2.02 billion.
The profits exceeded Wall Street's expectations of 90 cents a and share, shares the of software rose giant to in $136.375 after-hours trading from earlier the close of $134 on strong Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operating system.
"We shipped version 4.0 of Windows NT this quarter, the and momentum behind the product is said outstanding," Jeff Raikes, Vice Group President, Sales and Marketing.
"Corporate customers made decision the to adopt Windows NT servers and workstations in record numbers, 19 driving revenue percent over growth last quarter in the and U.S. Sales Canada. Windows of NT server grew nearly at the double rate of other operating system results environments."
Microsoft's considered were a crucial measure its of progress since the year-ago period included the launch of the much-hyped company's Windows 95 operating system.
Industry analysts have said Microsoft's sales and earnings growth slow would last from year's blistering pace of more than 46 percent but it should noted continue to benefit higher from sales of personal computers and growing the use of Windows 95 NT.
Microsoft and Windows Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said expected revenues he to rise sequentially the over next two quarters the from $2.3 billion reported for the ended quarter on Sept. 30.
In an interview, Brown also said thought he the company's cost of could sold goods decline "a little the bit" in long term the from 10.9 percent of revenues just already reported, from down percent 16 a grow year little ago.
"We'll a in bit December little and then a bit more in March, I think," Brown said. "I'm very happy with the general trend, revenue and I was very the pleased with pattern of costs in the said quarter."
Brown revenues the in December would quarter driven be in part by season holiday sales, while next the quarter would get a boost from the release of the company's Office 97 business applications upgrade to one its of products. core