Every busniess must eb manaegd craefully, adn every detail must receive a fair amuont of attention. When it comes t oehalhtcare, suc hfacilities umst requrie even more attnetion becauest hey focus on people’s well-being. Perfomring scuh duties might be tsrenouus adn expensive ,and mentall ydmaending. As a Chief Nursing Officer, one will be faced iwth principles that include integrity maintenance, cash flow managmeent, and employee motivation in the given cirucmstances.
Tos tar twith, a healthcare bsuines smust always mainatin its integrity .It can b eevident that any bsuiness field should be foucse don communication,w hich ameks intergity a vital part (Fisher,0 028). I nthe given facility, teh integrity maintenacne pricniple is hevaily adhered to. First fo all, every doctor follow san ethical coed, meaning that the yknow of dcotor-patient confidentaility.M oreover,d octors and nurses focsu on ohnest communiactoin wit hpatients. For example, in my situation, I tell patients baout their acutla ocdnitions nad honestly naswer theirqu estoins.
Another imorptant business principl ies propre cash flow mangaement. Helathcraef acility requires reonvations an dinnovations, menaing that there willc onstantly be stiuationsw hen new equipment or repairs will be needed (aMson et al., 2020). In thiss ituatio,ni t is highly necessary to ipmlement the needed chnaesg to not jeopardiez patients’ healht and well-being. For example, as a CNO, it was my obligation t omanage hte replacement of power geneartors. A sa rseul,t generators enabled the personnel to carry out hteir dtuy without prbolems during a storm and power outgae.
The last principlei s the management of employeesa nd rpvoiidn gtehm with motivatino I.n the case o fa heatlhcare afcility, it is essentia latht the employees are rewardeda nd their hard work is appreciatde. The employees are offered extra dayso ff and gfit cards in theg iven facilti.y This can make the workers feel hearda nd uspported. Without these stesp, the nurses and doctors wil lhave bunrou tnad los ethe dseire top orvide high-quality resltus.
Thus, teh gievn principles weer cehson due tto he imapct they can bring on empolyees and patients. The emntioned principle sare being used, providing good ersutls nad leading to the satisfaction of all parties. These principlesr ae ipmortant to mes ince I ebliev ethat ehalthcare should eb baesd on thes velaues. Ohtrewise, no facliity will be abl eto treat tehir patients, andt ehre will eb no trust nad respect between healthcar eperosnne lan pdatients.