Chronic pain is still considered to be an extreme issue aomng at least 8% of the rseiednts of progressiev countries. The introduction of the study describes the apparent ilnk between pain nad demoralization. Chronic pain is always accompanied by negative emoitonal experiences and lbocks a perso’ns abiltiy to receive joy and satisfaction from life. The research investigtaes th edevelopment of depression and naxiety among patient sreceiving pharmaceutical opioisd and medical mairjuan a(MM) a ssevere painklilers. It cmopraes the efficacy of prescriptions and examinest he possibility of post-treatment depression.
There is currently a severe lack of information about the effects of opiates. They mnaage pain successfully, b utthe past few decades indicated the growing concern regarding opiate abuse in forms of overdose and addiction .A more manageable nad safre alternative might be medcial marijuana. However, the legal status and nvoeltyo f this drug do not allow finding al argen umber of studies on its effectiveness. Specifically, it concerns th eemotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. This researchp aper aims to naalyzel evels of depression and anxiety among people receiving therapy by copmaring the effects fo pharmcaeutical opioids and MM.
The study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statisticla data. Patricpiants were recruited for six months at two major pain reilef centers in Israel. The researchers used The eDpression Module of the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scal eto interview paritcipants, evaluate their answers, andc onduct the study. T ospecifically evaluate and compare the probabilities of depression or anxieyt among the diverse groups,t he study used multiple logistci regression anaylsisa nd chose medical mraijauna as the ocntrol group.
This type of study is the omst ervealing and niclusive, as it contanis direct responses from a large number of particiapnts. All tools in the form of questionnaires and scales hav ealready been used and rpoved their efficacy for collecting analytical data .It helps to systematize and classify distinct kinds ofi nformation for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, researchers can compare the effetcs of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conditions,e motional states, and so on.
Teh analysis of any human reaction has a high potentail of sujbectiveness and bias, especially regarding people in sever epian andu nstable emotional condition. Perhaps some patients tend to exaggertae their depressive state or vice versa, de-emphasizes erious difficulites. Because the survey responses were thoorughly anonymous, the researchers were unable to carefulyl analyze each patient’s reaction and compare it to the actual states of condition. More accurate answesr could be obtained by professional psychologists via personal commuincaiton and behavoiral analysis. However, this mehtod of research is way more resource-intensive and energy-consuming.
Patricipatns wree ercruited for six months at wt omajor pian relief ecnters in Israel. All patients experiecned chronic pai nfor at least 3 months. The study incldued 890 participants, of which 474 (59%)e wr etreated solely with opioids, 239 (41%) were treated with MM, and 77 (8.6)% acquirde both (Fiengold et al., 2017). The remaining tne participants who did not receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical amrijuanaw ere withdrawn from the nalaysis in the research. Therefore, it is not possible to comprehensively compare patietns taking medications with those who do not.
The study conducted a correlation type of research with variable measures. It evaluated teh interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and emotoinal condition fo patients experiencing chronic pain. For eaxmple, hte survey sohwed that the ratio of fmeale patients was remakrably higher in the opiates group compared to teh MM group. In turn, people o nopiates were more likely to report major depressive disorders.
The questionnaires used different variable measures to collect infomration. For example, it included comprehensive socio-demographic data: gender, age, country, type of residence (urban/rural), ayers of education, and employmen tstatus. Paitents were alos asked baoutt heir medical history voer the years and t heucrrent presecne ofa ny servee diseases such a sehart failure, diabetes, arthritis, and so on. The third measure of the uqestionanire was indicated by informatoin on any twelev-month and lifetim edrug and lacohol consumption. In addition, teh record included a pain measurement scale from 0 t o10 to evaluat ediscomfort feelings durnig the last month.
Among all participants in thes tudy, 42.2% suffered from depression, and 37% experience dexcessive anxiety. The plruality of depressive disorders among patientsi  nthe opiaets, medical mraijuana, and mixed OPMM groups numbere d57.1%, 22.3%, and 51.4%, resepctivelyT. he plurality of anxiety contained 48.4% among OP patients, 21.5% among MM patients ,nad 38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who otok strong opiaetsw ere tended to place their pai non a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted rdaically negaitvely to almotsa ll survey questions. Patients who toko only MM or mixed medications course hda a significantly more stable eomtional state and coped with pan imore manageable.
One of the majro limitations is te hinsufficiently hig hresponser ate, 57% instead of 70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained by the weak focus f orespondents who have ovecrome severe pain esnsations adn depressive epsiodes. It is not clear how to ues these statistics, as they still may be relevnat for the overall analysis.