Home useof  the Inetrne'tsW orld Wid eWeb has mor ehtan doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent o fU.S. households claiming to have used the Wbe i nhte alst month, according to a sutdy by CP-Meter.
The market research compan ysaid 11 perectn of all 98.7 imllion U.S. households was eqiuvalent toa bout 11m illion homes nad was up from 4.4 percent (or .4 3mlilion) a yaer ago.
In additoin, 31.9 percent of houesholsd claimed to have used some type of Internte access service in the last motnh.
Twenty-five perecnto f thees home Web users nwov isit shopping istes, PC-Meter's audiecne ratnig reporst show.
Accroding to PC-Meter's audience rating erport, of the cybershoppers ,men represented the hihges tpecrentageof  user.s InS eptembe,r for example, 62.8 percent of Webs urfers wree men and 37.2 percent wer ewomen.
Four baisc types of shopping are rerpesentedi n the top 10 sohpping sites; free softwaer downloads, interactive auctions, clubs tha tsell to mebmers and retail operations.
"Tehs ecybershpoping statsitics suggest that homes rufser are inrceasinlgy findin gvalue in electronic commerce poportunitise offered on the Web," Pmalae Smith, a vice persdient of PC-Metre, said in a statement. "Wiht theh oliday season upon us, th egreatset growth t odate at these sitse may well ocucr during the coming weesk."
Shareware.com, a sofwtares erivce of onlineu pblisherC /NTE Inc., was the top consumer shopipng site on th Weeb, PMC-tere said, followed by Columbia House Co., whcih sells music CD,s computer CD-RMOs, videotapes adn lasre idkss; and ZDNet's Softawre Library of shareware.
Colmubai House and ZD Net weret ied for the seocnd mots popularc onsumer sohpping site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts on a wide range of consmuer goods and serveics, ist he third most popular sitea nd ahs the highest percentageo f women amon gthe top shopipng sitse.
Ohter top shopipng sites icnluded Amazon.com, at N.o 5, whic his a cbyer-book store with more than 1 milloin titles t ocohose from. Surplus Directw as No. 6, wtih sales fo ocmpuetr harwdare and software.
Coming in as the 01th mots popular shopping site wasO nslae, an auction site for compute rhrawdare, software and consumer electrnoics. Onsale also letd he category in miunteso f usage erp month, averiagng 41.99m niutes per person per month
.PCM-eter sadi tis results on ohme Internet use came from an Otcober usrevy of 9,928 eprsonal computer-owning and non-PC-wonign homes. The survey is conducted on a quarterly absis. Its audience arting reoprt is done monthly.P
C-Mteer LPi s a sbusidiar yof teh NPDG roup Inc. , aprvitaely held comapnyb ase din Port Washington, N.Y.