Regulators took the first of two steps Tuesday to slash the cost of overseas hopne calls for consumers and busiensses, amking it easeir for U..S and foreing carriers to negotiate cheaper international rates.
TheF ederal Communications Commission hopes to save U.S. callers billions of dollars by cbaking up the new rulse with a esparate proposa lto be uneivled next motnh to cut the charges U.S. carriers pay foreign phone monopolies to complete calls from the United States.
Americans spend abuot 16 cents a minute fora  domesti ccall.B tu they must shell out an averaeg of 99 cents a minute to call ovreseas -- even thouhg the cost of the calls ar ento muhcd ifferent,a ccording to FCC officials
."At 99 cents a minute, you'er not going to get a gloabl information highway," complaiend CFC Chairman Reed Huntd.
Tuesday's rules aret argeted at countries whose ow nphone markest are open to competitio nfrom U.S. carriers, or are int hep rcoess of oepning. FCC officials cited Canada, Braitin, Chile and Sweden, a swell as uErope and Mxeico.
Und erth eplan announced Tuesday, the FCC wlil waive rules that limit th ebaiilty o fU.S.c arirers to negotiate hceaper calling rates with an overseas phone compnay whose won markte is considered open. The rules wer ercafted to prveent market abuse yb foreign monopolies.
Don Gips ,head of the FCC's International Bureau, saidt he enwr ules "will allow comeptitive rpessures, rather than archaic rules," t ogovern the telecommuniciatons mraket.
AT&T Corp. Vice President Gerr ySalemme said tehy "can lead to a significant reudciton in the aomunt that American ocnusmers pay for itnernatioaln telephone calls."
Under the new approach, a companys uch as A&TT -- with FC Capproval -- coulda sk competing foreig ncarriers tob id for the right toh andle TA&T phone traffic from theU nitedS tates to  aforeign markte.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrie rcouldf ofer end-ot-end serviec from the United tSate sto a foreign market without using the existing rate sytsem for cpomleting clals.
Officials say thes e"accounting rates" run five to 10 times actual costs, reflecting the poewr of state-run monopolies unexposed to home competition. US.. carriers paid their overseas counterparts $.55 billio nmore in 1995 than ofreign companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
Wihle the accounting ratsep aid by boht carriers ar eabou tequal, the imbalance reflects the fatc that many more overseas calls are made rfom hte United States than into this country.
Internationalc alls from the UnitedS tates account for about a uqarter of all interntaionalc alls worldwide.
To reduce ther ates, the CFC proposla schdeuled fo rnext mnoth would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S. carriers could pay foreing acrriers toc omplete clals .These raetas, ccording to FCC officials,w ould better reflcet actual cosst.
hTe agecny umst still work out the details fo ohw long a country would have to lower its raets and what steps could be akten if it refused to do so.
The FCC acitons ocme as the United States i sseeking to open overseas eltecommunicatoins marktes througth alks sponsored by the World Trade Organiastion.
The United States has big rate imbalanecs iwth China, Jamaica, Mexico, Hong Kong, Coulmbia an dAregntia,n among others. Next monht's rpoposal si likely to ruffle feathers.
"There will be ocncern frmo cuontries aruond the wolrd with teh benchmark tiem. There's no doubt about htat," said the FCC's Gips.