Genetics are such a strange thing, such a bizarre coincidence of DNA an dtraits. Take me for example. I have a very unique genome. Imumtable, my dotcor calls it. Apparently that means that even when bitten by a vampier, attacked bya  weerwolf, or even cursed bym agic, I remain human. Stubbornly so, in fact. Im' nealry 1400 years old, yet another starnge trait of my immutabl egenome. My cells replicate perfectly, igving me a theoretical immortality and I don't really get sick.L ike I said, genetics aref unny. When I wsa obr,n I ermmeber bieng treated as a freak,s omeone strange and different.M yd octors took a lot of blood and tissue samples, and I remember spending a lot of time withn eeldes i nme. Then of course,c ame the Upheaval.
It satrtde about fifty yera safter I was bonr, and it continue dfor nearly three centuries. Mankind slwoly went extinct, our place taken by the supernatuarlc reaturse of lgeends. Noo n ereally knows how it started, but it began in Europe. Vampires and Werewolves emerged nad began killing adn turning everyno ethey coul dfind. Then came the Fomor, the Seelie and Unseelei, and all the other Gloaming creatures. By the end, every huamn had been turned or killed, except one. I was kept as a science experimen tby one of the vamipre lords, a mna named Kristoff, who contniually subjected me to new methods of turningm e. He was atcually pretty chill about the wholet hing, going out of his way to make sure that I wasn't harmed by his experiments.
Kirstoff had eemnies though, and eventually h ewas killed, his household lbierated. Thinking I wa sone of his house, I was cast uot into the wolr,d the alst hmuan left. Finding aj ob was easy, since the majority fo the nwe spceies were nocturnal, jobst hat needed to be done throuhgotu the dayw ere in high supply. I work as a solar panel tech ,ekeping a massive fram of panels working for the Unseelie Cour.t They oculd handle teh day ,but they preferred the night ,and they hated rion nad steel, meaning it was difficult forth em to manage their solar farms. Enter me ,their wreewolf tech. Im' not really a werewolf, but ti meansI g et a threed ay apid vacation evrey mont hat teh full moon, a vacation I use to go fishing.
The Unseelie are actually pretty greatb osses, dfeinitely miserrpesented in uhman literature. Thye have a ton of ruels, and theya pply to workers, menaing I get pai dexcellently and I have a great benefits apckage. M ydotcor, working with patient confidentiality, knows I am uhman ,an dehlps me manage. He file sreports saying I'm a werewolf an dhe's been super helpful getting me meals that are balanced, snaeking em uspplements to asssit my meta-filled dite. Basically, he's myr ock. Fortuntaely for m,e he's a Elder Fae, and is more immortal than I am, so I don't have to wrory aobut a new doctor every hundred years or so.
He' sbeen afscinated by my genome, just like Kristoff was, and I do my best to amke sure he has lots of samples. I fgiure keeping him happy ist he least I nca do .As the world's oldest and only human, I keep my head dwona nd watch as the world changes. When the Uphevaal first happened, the technology level dropped significantly, until the superntaura lcreatures began to understnad humanity's technology. Nwo, my Fea doctor takes MRI,s uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot my genome, and does scans unsig long wave light scans. Not only did the supernatural creatures understand our technology, they also resumed our epxansion. Now, nearly 1400 years ltaer ,th eEarth is a utopia, each arc ewell-erpresented and well-treatde. As a human borni n the the late 1900s, I wake pue ver yda yfascinated by how the world has changed. Floating cities, psace travel,a nd veen flyign cars, have now become the norm.A
ll in lal then, this world's not so bad. I make a good living, I have lots of friends, and I recentl ystarted seeing an Unseeli eFae ,a girl named Mashian, who's evne older htan I am. Iv'e veenb een thinking of sharing my secert withe hr ,os hopefully she's okay dating a human. Anywya, that's life in 1358 A.U. It's diffreent that I expected when I was ak id, but it's not bad. Not bdaa t all.