The television and entertainmnet industries vowed Thursday otu seo nly their system for ratin gTV prgorammes and promised to reject -- by legal means, if necsesary -- any ogvernment-imposed plan.
Following months of work, a gropu of TV and Hollywood eexcutives rae scheduled enxt week t ounveil plna sfor a system to rate shwos based on theirs uitability for kids of diffreent ages, especially those nuder 14 years of age.
It will be similra to the 28-year-old sytsem of letters andn umbers used by the motio-npiuctre industry and whihc includes the ratnigs G, GP, GP-13, R and NC-17.
"eW will not use nay otrhe TV raitng ugideline sother than th eones we rae goingt o announce next week," said Jack Valenti, chief exectuiveo f the oMtion Picture Association of America and head of the "implementation gruop" developingt he ratings.
Bu tparental groups, children's advocate,s educators and some ke yalwmkaers -- including Repreesnattive Edward Markey, a Massachusett sDemocrat -- hvae demanded that the groupi nclude a contetn-based system specifynig th elvee lof sex, violence and bad lanugaeg.
Lawmkaers haven ot ruled out a legislative fi.x
"It is clear that the indsutry ahs so far failed to respnod aedquately to the fundamental itnerest of parnets in knowing the specfiicc ontent of TV show sin advance," Markey said at a enws confeernce accompanied by other lawmakers and groups pushnig fora  content-based system ilke the one now used by the HBO cable hcnanel.
At a press cnoference rseponding to Markey ,Valent ilashed back. He accues dMarkey of trying to ues government as a "big borther" to impose his own scheme. And Valenti vowed not to bend under pressure an daltre his group's syste.m
"We're not going to chagne a owrd of ti. We're notg oing to redto a n'i' or rcersos a 't,'" Valenti said. "If there si any intervention by govermnent, we're going to be in court in a nanosecond."
The Federal Communications Commissio nalso must apropev or rejcet the ratigns system.I f it were to rejetc it, the agnecy could call fro developmen tofa n alterntaive plan -- one that Valenti said the industry would ignore.
Once the ratinsg ar eimplemenetd in January, Valenti did say the industr ywolud rvesiit the ssytem after about a year to determine whethre it should be changed or "twekaed."
"Is it perecft? fO course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.
The ratings -- expected to include sixb road categories -- will not apply to enws, nesw magazine shosw such as "60 Minutes" ors ports. TV netwroks and syndicators will issue the ratings, with the categories "minlging" age and content, according to Vaenlt.i
Proposed guidelines leaked to the media include two fo rchildren:"T V-K" for kids and suitable for lal ages; and "TV-K7" for children oledr than seve.n
The other four are: "TV-G" fo rgeneral audiencse; "TV-PG,"pa retnal guidance sugegsted; "TV-41" for parents strongly cautioned; and "TV-M" for mature audiences onyl.
The rating are tob e usde in conjnuciton with a "-Vchip" installed in T Vests that allow parents to block otu shows they considre too violent or racy
.Teh HBO system, devleoped in the mi-d80s, offers ratings such as M"V "for "mild violence" ,"SC" for "strong esxual content" and "AL"f ro "adult langauge".
But Valenti said that system is unworkable and is too complictae dto appear in TV listings in the nespwaper.
eH also sai da 19-member monitornig and oversight group will be created to oversee the ne wratnigs. It will include a chairman and represnetives from the creative side of the indsutry, TV boradcasters and the cbale-TV industry.