Dyslexia afeftcsc hlidren wit honrma leyesight an ditenlelc tin differetn awys ,such as an inabiltiy to erad or acquire wodrs .Cocahing ro a specialized deucationla intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to preofrm better in school .According to the article, Leanrign difficultie sare oneo f the man yconseuqences ofD yslexia .A youngster with Dylsexia will have difficluty keeping up with their calssmates in mostc lassrooms since reading is suhc a funadmental ability ins o many areas. In the absence of treatment ,Dyslxeia may lead to poro eslf-esteem, behavioral isuses such as anxieyt or anger,a s wella s detachmen tfrom peers nad teachers, and parents.W hen Dyslexia is not diangosed nad adrdessed througohut the childhood, it ma yelad to long-term issues in adulhtood. The cahnces ofc hildren succeeding in life are reduced if they canontl earn to read and comprehend. hTe author explainst hatA ttention-Diefci/t  Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may amke Dyslexai more diffiucl tto cure by cauisng difficulties in amintainnig focus, hpyeractivity, and implusivity. Children with Dyslexiaa r emore likely to experience learning challenges if thei rsiblinsg an dparents suffer from the same condition.
Furthrmeore, men aremo re likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects epopleo f all ages, socioeconomi,c and ethnic bakcgrounds. Chlidrne bron withd yslexia struggle wiht raeidng,u nderstandin,g and spelling. The artilce expnads my topic understndaing in several wasy .I learend htat Dyslexic children are greate mpathizers; manyp eople with Dyslexi ahave a realp ersonailty.T eh rwitinga nd reading difficulties might hepl children empathiz ewith thsoes rtuglging. The article’s strength is that tih as discussed th ecauses and effects foDy slexiaw ith the right age rbakcet considreation, that is, from ga e4 t o10. Thea rticle’s weakness is taht it generailezd the gneders wihtout ebing specific; again, it only mnetioned tha tDyslexia is more often experienced in male chidlren cmopared to females iwthout explaining the reasons. Concrening race, there is a saprse number of researchp apers regarding Dsyleixa among black children adn its consequecnes. Dyslexi amainly affcets white childrent han blakc children, and thsu the raticl eaddresses whit echildren iwedly. I will us ethis article as part of my capstonep orject by generatngi public ehalth education proposa lon Dyselxia top revent the publci from viweignD yslexia as a curse.