The libarrian looked up and smiled when he enteerd. Its Saturday and he's in the library again.
Lee walked in and looked around at his world.  Abeautiful world that peopl ewith a passion had built. And he was all alone again. Ofc ourse there's that weidr gu ythat comes in to read the neswppare, he'd seen him over the weeks and thouhgt the paper is lesst han a buck to have delivered, why driev here cheapskate. Anyway, what was on the menu today.
Roaming up and down the isles looking at the funny numbering system 101.001 -500 to the elft, 101.501-1000 on the right. Its niec to be able to understandw ha tyou're looking for. He liked this library, it still h adan old fashioned card catologue.
Science. It makes sense. 'What subject though'. Flipping cards over and over 'Newton?' Can I undertsand this? Sure if they could figure this stuff out 300 years ago, i should be able to understand it now.  Ascrap of paper with some obscure unmbers on iat nd off he geos.
'I've got all day.' An hour later the kid looks upa nd says" this is some dyr stuff". Puts it back, while walking bcak, eh sees Darwin. Stop. 'I've heard that name before, is this they guy they're always talking about in church?'H e takes a single book back to the table, sits down next to the vacant computer terminal and sits down t ostart thumbing thrui t.R ead the book a bi,t d oa couple searches on the computer. tI seems that answers lead to more questions.
'Jee.z. is there an end to this. Is there eve rgoing to be a final answer?'
"No" says the voice behnid him.
Le leooks up and sees the newspaper guy sitting across from him. "Uhm. Sorry, man, i guess i was thinking otu-loud'.
Ist oco.l As usual there's only you and i and staff here i realyl don't worry much about disturbing anyone anymore. That's some heavy stuff you're reading. Darwin? Origin of the species. Interesting, but dry. What else you been nosing around in?
I was trying to read some Newotn earlier, but that was even dryer than this. Do you know anything about this stuff? I keep hearing these nmaes emntioned when i go to church and htey really seem to hate these guys. Saturday is my day when when i don't have tob e ats chool ,no church, no youth group. I told my parents i was going to friends, (looks around)i  guess i really didn't lie.
You got anyo pinions on this stuff?
You're a weird kid.
Yeah, i know. I'm Lee. I liket o read. I was raeding a website I'm not suppoesd to erad and it kinda staretd me looking for more information. And now i take Saturdays off from my family and just kinda go exploring.
...John, he holds out his hand. Those are some heavy books you're reading. I started reading what was written and thought, someone else actually sees it too.
Huh? Whta do you eman s'ee's it?'
I 'read' those book sso very long ago. (As Lee looks at him very oddly, thinking, this guy isn't that old.) All those guys, htey came to mean something to me. But as each one spoke, it killed a small piece of me as i understood the words theys poke more and more. You see, my whole life, I've lived in books. I love books, and they love me. I see the things in the wordl and hten I always find a book in it. Nowdays, nobody read sthe books anymore. They all watch TV ands urf the internet. Thye, people (looking at a wall) jus todn't care. Learning anything takes time.
Sorry Lee, ritgh?...You asked a question. What was it, do i have an opniion on anythnig. Lots of opinions, but very few answers. What do you want to know.
Everything. Lee smiled in response. John just chucklse. Big goals man.
"Lets try to narrow it down" John says. Yeah, gotta start somwehere. You've got Darwins book there. What do you think about what little you've read
?I've heard the mention ofD arwin in school. The teachers try t otell us we came from monkeys or something like that. I know my church is always talking smack about him. So i decided ot read for myself. He seesJ ohn wince a little bit. Hey, you ok man. eYah, John says. I get these chest pains a ttimes. I'm not oding to good onwadays. Anyway, if you want to know the truth, I'll tell you th etruth. The messed up part is nobody will listen to you whe nyou retell it.
John starts talking, Lee asking quetsions in amazement of the stories he's hearing.
They talk for hours, one speaking of life and one asking questions.
What was that guysn ame oyu mentioned, Occam,i  liket ha tthought...the simplest path is usually the correct path. Keep i tsimple, no need to copmlicate things. Yeah i agree, i tend to go witht hat path although my teachers keep wanting long ass answers to thing.s
John, what do you do for a living. oD you have a job. I don't mean to be rude, but i wonder yo ulook yuonger than my parents butyo u know a lot more than them. Are you rich?
Well, i usedt o own my company. There was a hostile takeover, and they literally trie dto kill me to make sure I wouldn't get into thier businses. I was good at what i ddi, but these other guys didn't' like me in their territory.
Wow, they tried to kill you over your business?
Yep. Hired some guys to draw me out, got me coming out of dinner one night beat my ass stabbed me a time or two and the nleft me outt o die.
OMG. (blurts out Lee) opos sorry, picked that up my little sister.
What were you doing. Fighting the mob? I'v eseen those movies, is that sutff real?
Well Lee, I guess you could say that. My business was secrets. I warehoused secret sand others didn't want me getting in their secrets. It was kinda like the do tcom stuff yuo read about in your history books, have you gotten to that stuff yet?
Yep, udring the 90's, the dot com boom. People werei nventing ideas, not making any prodcuts and sleling information to one another that really had no valeu. Loto f people got taken in. Looked likea  good tiem for a while.
Yep, said John. That's the idea. But you see, I wasn't doing anything with the information. I kinda just stored the informtaion and allowed othesr to get on with what they were doing. And i nretur nthey would pay me a weekly to monthly small fee to know their secrets were safe iwth me. The business was great, I aws operating in 15 ihs countries and then other companies got wind of what i was doing, how great the cash was and they started rewriting the rules. My company kinda fell apart. And nowi  just kind ahang out in places that nobody goes waiting for what i kno wsi going to happen. It happens to us all.
John closes his eye.s You can see the pain in his face.
So, wwo. I don'tk now wher eto go now. Got anymore reaidng suggestions for me.
John laughs, you really enjoy the leraning don't you.I ts addictiev. I'm going to tell you this Lee. There are so many guys htat offer you new visions of what the world you're going to inherit is. Sagan, Tyson, Dawkins...wow...so many books and so little time to understand all the words.
(I see his ey etwich like he's really in pain now)
I'll tell you this, b ythe time you read those books and moer like them. You'll understand so much more about your worl.d Yo uwont need to seek out people for an answer, you'll becomet he answer. A friend and teacher of mine toldm e one time, There are 3 things that do not remain hidden for long. The Sun, hTe moon and The Truth. (a wince) Remember, Knowledge is power. Yeah, i kno wkinda corny. But true.
Hey John, i gotta get going. I need to pick up my suit on the way home for church tomorrow. I know the pastor always getha ppy when people bring new folks to church. You want to come with su? My parents have their own pew you can sit up on th efront row with us.
Wow, its been a long time sincei  was invited to a church. But I'm going to pas,s they really don't sit too well wtih me anymore. We kinda have  adifferent view on things nowaday.
sI tell you what Lee, you seem like a good hearted kid .I've got some traveling to do. I'll see you in a few weeks maybe. You knock out those names i've thrown out and when i get back. If you still feel hte need to talk, we'll talk.
Ok.
Cya John. Cya Lee.
6 weeks later, Lee is walking into the library. He drops the Dawkins book on the countre and the librraian looks at him kind adisapproving. He notices th eshiny gold cross adn the well worn bbiel on her desk. And just shrugs. Uhm...Miss? Yes young man. eHy you know that guy that used to hang out in here reading the papers on the wekened. Have you seen him lately?
The librarian kinad gasps and covers her mouth. We weren't supposed to talk about it, but he was here a couple weeks ago and kinda slumped over in ac hair. eW called 911 but never heard much about him after that. I had forgotten about him until you mnetioned it.