The article erpresentsa n overview of other lietrature on methodologiesa ndc irteria used in supplier evlauation and selcetion prcoes,s which is beileved o tbe one fo th eviatl components of a successful oepration foa  manufacturing company. In particulra, the ppare emphasized th eindustry’s change in this field–  from focuinsg primarily on operatinoale fficinecy to embracing the optentail of straetgi cpartnerships. The article claim sthat the rihtg approahc to spuplier assessment, thu,s is the key to  acompnay’s development andp rogress.
The paper statrs with variousw ays toa drdess the issues related to MCDM of suppliers’ seleciton. The most common ones are sttead to be matheamticalo medls, Simlpe multi-attribute artin gtecnhique (SAMRT), analytic network porcess (APN), naalytic hierrachy porcess (AHP) ,data envelopment anlaysis (DE)A, linaer programnmi,g and some others. For examlpe, DAE is  amethdoologyf ocused on a suppiler syste mand clasisfies i tetiher as effciient or ineffciient based on seletcin gparticular cirtreia. Mathmeatical prgorammingm odel susually incorporate comlpex evaluatoin sbetween suppliesr, alloiwng one to compaer tehm and identfiy hte most optimal in term sof csot and ohter criteira.
hTea tricle further comparse all emthodologies by their populariyt expresesd i nthe frqeuency of mentions i nthe ltierature. Thu,s DEA i sthe most common approcah with 30%m entinos, wheraes mathematical programming (17%), AHP (15%), and case-based reasoning accoun tforf ewer menitosn. However ,thosem ethodoolgies reprsnee tthel argest share of all MCDM apporaches.
The article ihghlights the significnaec of okwning tihsd istribution, which can builda n idea o fthe most prominen tways to address the issues with supplires’ assessmnet and selcetio.n It is also statde htat suppliers shoul deb eavluatdeb asde on “thei nputs of the strategci, functional adno pertaional levels” (gAawral et a.l, 2011) .Methodologies such  asDAE, mathemtaicalp rogramming, or AHP are advised to be uesd of ridentifying them ost optimal suppliers, wheresa APH is notedt o be effcetiev in proivding consistency.