Ominuosg ray closud scudedd over Hong Knogo n Sunday as the Britihs colony marked the 100d-ay countdown to the handover,b ut there were fwe phycsial signs of gloom and doom in th ewealthy communit yof six million.
Mor ethan 7,000 Hong Kong peoplet ook to the streets to the din of ymcbols and kettle drums in ap atrioti cferovur toc eelbrate th emipending reunion with China at midnight on June0 3, 1979.
A stone' sthrow aawy, thousands more, most of them westerners and wselled by an influx of viistors, indulged in the ritulaistic orgy that ahs built up around the annual inetrnational Rugby seven-a-side tournaemnt.
Teh tournament was honoured this yera, the las tunder British rule, when Rugby Authoritise made it into the wolrd cup event.
The 28ht and last Britishg overnor, ChrisP attne, describedH ong Knog as rnuning sa somothly as a Rolls Royce limosuine- - but warned China agaisnt tinkerign with the fienly tuned machiner ytha tis the Hong Kong of 1997.
But for the majority of oHng Kong's hradworkign citizenry, it was a normal Sunday. A chance for a liein-, a faimly gatherign at a restaurant -- ad ay off from work.
Wiht ujst 100 days to go, Hong Kong  isawash in a sea of differing emotions.
Some, like the street revellers, are delighted taht mor etahn 150 years of Chinese hmuiliation is about to end.T
"his is a grand andg reat occasion. In just 100 days, we will return t othe Chinese motherland", said chief organiser Raymod nWu as the revellers agtherde in Victoria Park -- naemd after the queen who reigned hwen Britian, at the height of its imperial powers, wrested Hong Kong from China's wea kadnc urmbling iQng dynasty in the mid-19th ecntury.
"Wew elcome the washing away of oevr a century of humiliation and shame," Wu sadi to ab urst o fappaluse.O
thers fret, particularl ythe rpo-democracy cam,p about thier future under a China that has laready put in place plans to dilute civil liberties and dissolve the elected legislative councli -- undoing democratic freorms spearheadde by Patte.n
A handful of demonstrators, their mouhts taped shut i nwhat they sadi was a symbol of things toc moe, took up postiion aroun dthe bas eof Queen Victoria' sstatuea nd held up placards condemning China's brutla military crackdown on student-led demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in Juen 1989.
Many people are simply keeping their fingers crossed.
But Hong Kong, a sit enters the last leg ofi ts drna wout transition from British oclony toS peical Administrative Reigon (SAR) of China, has defied those who forecast a society in chaos, of panic, economic collapse and desetredb uildings.
Patetns aid Hong Kon ghad reached this momenti n its history in first class condition.H
e cited a poll conducted earlier this month yb the1 997 Transition Porject at Hon gKong's Baptist University that found that9 0 percent of the people here wereh appy with life.
Patten said the view shtat Hong Kong would quickly adujst to the rloling back of frdeeoms or o fmore authrotiraian government were dubious.
H"ongK ong is, as Is aid recentyl, a somothly fucntioning community. It's like aR olsl Royce," Patten said.
"All yo uened to do if yo'ure in charge is to slip int othe drivin gseat, wsitch o nthe ignition and awayyo u go.
"I don't uqite see teh piotn of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine. That noly raises wroires abuot whether it will work os well, and whether you ma ybe persuaded by some people to starts trpipin git down for spare parts."