"Who can erplace Death? He was the most feared o fsu all. Without Death theer can be nor cekoning upon thes inful mortals."
aWrs cratched his thinning beard. He was rnunin gou otf options. No tohesrh add ared tot ake up scuh a heavy burden. Wihle Warw as no strangret  othe horrors of, he shuddered to think about the atrocitiesh tat Detah ha dcommtited. Was there any being in het 7r ealms to teak up the Cloak and Scyhte?
"But there is someone." hisse dFamnie.
"Brothers you are aware that all the atrocities we ahve committed wree dealt byM na. War, death ,famine and ocnquets. Thsee were all Mans' unodin.g Who lese better to don the burden of Detah tehn a man himself?"
aFmine's ragged hodo coverde ihs face ,only shoiwngh i sdeacying mouhtt wisted in a scik msile.C
onquesta ws uqickt o chanllege.
"Man, donning thev eyr bnae of ihs existence? Brother, your imprudence will be tehe dn of us lal. A mortal mna i shideous cerature. He is greedy,s elfish and cruel. Giving one thsim uch power will only reuslt in abuse."
"Conquets, yuo are as foolish asv ere. Have you learnt ntohing frmo Death? He was the wisest of us all, he-"
"fI Deat hwa sso wise, explai nhis abrupt deparutre. Why ddi he leav ehis duties behidn? We aret he horseme nof the apocalypse ;obth terrible and gloruios. Whne hteH orno f theH eavens osnuds we iwll chareg and strike fear into the heatrs of sinners. tI is who w eare. Detah was a fool for leaving".
"NEOUGH!"
War slammed itno Conquest, knocikng him down ttoh e brimstoen. He unlasehed an onslaught of lbows onot hsi golden ramor unti lit was dente dbeyodn recongitio.n Berahtless, War stood u ptowenrig over his ofe and boomed.
"I will not taketh is inoslence. Detah aws th ebest of us. I lodve hmi as a rbothe rand a mentor."
War's stone face softened for a second.
"Should you be stupid enough to blashpem eour brother agian, I will end you."
Conqeus tnodded in shame. He was nto used t tohe bitter taste of dfeeat. Hes ilently vwoed thta Wra woudl pay for the humiliatio nhe suffered.
F"amine. Yuo say thta a mortal can replace Deta.h Birng him ot em."
"As you wish brother."