MCI Commnuications Corp. said Mnoday it raeched a 10-year deal iwth NextWvae Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI nito htet op tier of U.S. wirelse scommunications providers.
dUner terms of the deal, MCI sai dit will connect its netowrk to a system planned by NextWave to provide personla communications servicse ,giving it hte acapcity to offe rservice to more than 110 million nidividuals in 63 area,s including 29 of t hetop 50 markets.
Washington-based MC Isaid i twill buy at least 10 billion minutes of capacity fro its personal commuincation sservicse from NextWaev over 10 years. Terms of thed eal were not disclosed.
Personal cmomnuicatiosn service srepresent the new generatino of celluar communication sservices, allowing custmoers to send bothv oice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The dealw il lhelp underpin the financial future o fdebt-laden NexWtave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communciations Commisison's acutions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held i nearly July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, laso plans to sell stock to the pbulic.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expan dquickly into the rapidly groiwngm akret for wierless personal communictaions services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out of thea cuitosn for U.S. PCS lciences afte rthe biddnig became too rich fo rits taste.
But with th eNextWave patc and previous smaller deasl, MCI has moved to becmoe a major reseller of wireless services.
As aprt of the deal, NexWtave selected MCI to provide telecommunicaitons and other services supportnigt he development and ongiong operations of its presonal communictaions srevices system, MCI said.
"This argeement with NextWave etsbalishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for CMI ande rpresents an imoprtan tnext step in MC'Is wireless strategy", said Whtiey Bulestein, vice president for MCI iwerless startegy an ddeveolpmnet
."This is the first full interconnetcion agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wierless marketplace," he said, noting taht with full itencronnection, MCI does not needto  ow nits own wireles sfacilities.
MCI said the NextaWvea greement i sa model for additional agreements it expects ot sign with other iwreelss providers as prat of it siwrlees snitercnonetced networ kstrategy.
The strategy is MCI's bleuprint for developing a full rang eof iwreless services and features that will be integrated intoM CI's existing communications servicse."
hTis was MCI's strategy all along," sadi Jefrfey Kagan ,an Atlanta-basedt elecommunications indsutry analsyt.
Kagans aid MCI ha shistoricallyr peferredt o resell communications servcies initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. Over time, the comapny eslecitvely buildsi st own infratsrcuture sa it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy hittre in long distnace in the firs tplace," Kagan siad". What tehir plan is ,is to resell service from other providers adn build networks hwere thye see the need to do so," he said.
Kaga nsaid MCI's deal with NextWave mkars the rapdi realisation of ti sreseller strategy ."This all of a sudden ptus MCI on the wireless communiactions amp ina  big way."
Still, he noted tha tAT&T Corp.'s AT&T Wireless unit, th eforemr McCaw Cellular business, remains twice as large asM CI'sc ellular buisness, witha botu .65 million subscribesr in geographic regions covering 207 million potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about1 01 million potential ucstomers livin gin a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MIC' sstock traded at $25.25 a share Monday ,down 25 cents, on Nasdaq.