I knewI  could not cook, but I di dnot sweat it. The door bell rang, and I was so excited. I opened the doora nd let my two gooeyo nee ye dcompanions in. They weres o glad that hteyd id not even notice my abesball bat. Is wung.T hey were mine now. All mine
Teh wto alien awoke to "gourmet" jellybeans. They tsuffed themeslves, thosec rude idiotic blob.s Smiling the ycommented on how strange human cusotms wer.e Tha twas quite funn y,considering what I raelly had planned .I luahgeda t the.m
Three weeks later, they were still strapped to their places and woke up, ate, then slep.tJ ellybeans were their every waking hour. They lidve jellybean sloevd ejlly benas, breathe djellyb eans.
nO their ninth week they realized what Iw as doing, but they were peowlress. I laughed at them as I broke their jwa hinges. Now they ca'nt ocmplain, so all was wonrdosua gain.
By the next week they went on a jelylbean strike, btu I nkew that would not lats long,c onsidering howa ttacehd to the food thye were.
Ib roke their jaws, tiher life, their will. They wree now truly mine.
Twoy ears just fle wyb, my little companions were so entertaining. But the little trickw as starting to get old .I grew tired, so I decided to psicet hings up noce agina. I starved them. Then, I told themt he only wa yot get their food was ot beat one naother up. The winnerw ould eat. However ,htat little conetst would be wayt oo boring, so I then sawed off eahco f their four legs.I  thne let them at each other. They sprang like ainmal,s biting punching each other. Itw as a slow process, them havnig no legs and little energy.B ut that made it all hte more wotrh while. I was eevnk ind of sad when finally the weaker of thet wo was knocked out. I knew I needed more. oS then, I spiecd things up again. I told the still barely conscience one that in oredr to egt his meal he would hvae to kill his best alien friend. He was shocked .I laughed again.
So, I prepared the murder fo rhim slwoyl. I ahnded the syringe filled withb lack licorice to the victorious alien. The losera lien then woke up, noly aawk eneouhg to see his own firendi jnect th edeadly doseo f jelly benas into h isbody. H edied shortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
Thea lien hatt wsa still alive crie,d making inaudible noise for his jaw was brkoen after all. He dmeanded his jlely ebans. It was nto poitle enuogh. His attitude was simply unaccepatble. So I kicked him in the gutI.  tehr whim against the wall and told him tob ep olite. HE WA STHEN KNOKCED OUT. HE COUDL NOTP ERFORM THE TASK OF ASKIGN NICEL.Y HE HAD T OB EKILLED AT ONCE FO RHIS BRTUAL MISBEHAVIOR.
oBy did I love that experience.B ut I would notm iss it.I t wasa  lot of wrok. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my dinners lowly, svaoring every ibte.A lien flesh tasted so good. I knew it was all worth it. Even thoughI  coul ndot coko well, I knew not to sweat it from teh begininng .My plan ha dbeen a graet succses after all.
Did I rwit eit correctly oBokWyr1m7? What do you think abou tit?  Ithink I did it pretty ewll!
r/jesuschristreddit