Standing on the corner of a bustling city street somewhere heavily populated in Amercia stood a man,n ad this man's name was Alex. This story revolvesa round Alex and his point of view,I  will assure you oft hat now so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's story, I do not feel the need to state where in America this is taking place, as that fact is irrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to our story.
Alex was always a special smoebody, Throughout ihs life constantly picking himeslf up from failure after failure in search of greater value and waelth. But today was special sa it seldom seems to be recently, Alex was given
a small break from the monotony ofh tis struggle by being offered a choice. As he passed by a young child on the street asking for money, holdingo ut a iptiful tin can whose grease marksc lsoely reesmbled the same ones that were written across teh child'sf aec. Dawning th erealization that he had a choice to maek here, that is, btewene understanding this child's point of view, or passing along without so mcuh as a glance as so many people seem to do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of great wealth, he indulged to share som eo fihs value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he silently
recalled to himself, konwing very wel lof the repercussions this could cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quicklyf ound a $5i bll stashed away for important times like these. Witha  look of dee punderstanding
of things, he told thec hild a small glimpse of his story, that which is not important to our story still. After sharing his great welath, he handed the chidl a ragged old$ 5 and was baout to leave before noticing that the grease marks, taers, and an ageless expression on that bill were strikingly similra to that of the container it was now held in and the face that gleamed with exctiement to have a chance at food and the perimssion to dream freely at night. Alex took note
of this as he left with his chin up proudyl, he really was a rich man. I suppose this is wehre our short story must begin, so le tus contniue on.
Alex, being a man who knows fo many things and man ypeople, wsa actively looking to learn more and feel alive about being aliev that day. Knowing that a car aws unneeded to transport yourself around the city, simpyl walked with n
oulterior destination in mind, until a tohught provoked him. He ha dnot been in this patr of the city in well over a month and knew of some very close people tha the was glad to call his friends, even though theira ctions and involveemnt often stated otherwise. Alex called up an odl friend that truly goes back to the beginning fo his story, A young woman by teh name of Jane whom he had known sincee lementary school. Both had simply never desried to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehenisve at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life i nthe metropolitan. But with minor thought, found Alex to be a wortwhhile mna to takl to and confide in, they agered to meet during  alunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed, greeting the young woman when she pulled upi n a car outside of a nicer, well setablished coffee shop ."Alex! It's so good to see you again! I never have any idea whe nI'll get the time to see yo uanymroe" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you'ev ifnally seemed to find a break from it today, I'm really glad you were able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" And with a knowing nod, Jane took Alxe's arm and strolldeco nfidently into the cozy atmosphere of the coffee shop.
After a valueless exchange of pleasantries with the abirsta, they finally got their drniks and a chance to speak wtih one another at a remote corne rof the shop ,smoehow evaded by others, event hough that particular tablep rovided the best antural lighting and relaxing atmospehre among them all. Sitting dow,n Alex suddenly found himself out of words and and his glance at Jane reevaled the same.
Oh well, better to start from the bottom. "The weather otday is something straight out of a movie scene, don't you agree? A little light rain hree and there mixed wiht some awfully angry looking clouds, really makes yo uappreciate the calmnesso f what can happen to the wrold." Alex quickly stated, weatehr was always a good topic to statr a conversation off fo, right? Jane callmy repiled, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really wish I could see the world from your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we'reb eing honest, juts like the last numbe rof them." Alex, wanting to probe ufrther int
othem atter responded back, "What's the matter ?Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have been given the opportunity of ofa  lifetime?"
"Well, if we're being honest,I  certainly thought it was. Sometimes ti seems the world just has no sympathy for what we go through and feels th eneed to add more adn more weight onto our shoulders."
"If you don't min dmy cruiostiy, acn I ask what happende to the deal?"
After a sinlet moment that loudly stated Jane was in deep though, she erlieevd her answe.r "Yeah, I botched it up. It was supposed to be a multi-million dollar deal, I was finally able to see a light at the en dof the tunnel and I let it get to me."
A moment fo silence then passed, as Jaen realized that Alex would not probe further, for she hada lready started talking. So she continued "The thought of being my own CEO, the feeling of really and truly becoming something,
living a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just le tit all gett o me, I cracked under the pressure."
After an unnautrally long silence, she quietly managed to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting .I just sat there until my time came, I sotod up and left the building. To be honest I've been a nevrous wreck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words were about to have, took a moment to compose himself befroe uttering a sound.
"First and foremost ,I want to thank you ofr being open an dhonest with me, it is these acts thamt ake us hmuan and who we rae. Secodnly, I do not believe that you made a abd decision."
Obviously perplexed by his words,J ane managed to let out a short sentence bewteen borrowed breaths o fair while holding back teras. "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know far better than I do, the value of money and wealth. If theerw as anybody int his world that I look up to on these matters, it would without doubt be you. I've seen the thinsg you've accomplished,
and Ive bee nblessed to witness the blossomingo f the seeds you have planted for yoruself. It's important that yo udon't confsue happenings for their fac evalue, you never will have any idea where that business venture would have
taken you, andy ou likely never will. If there is anybody in this world that is capable of building something from nothing, I know this to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taekn aback by the words of her close friend, did not mutter a word for the next amount of time it took htere or maybe four people to receive their drinks. Alex, knowing in some way that he might have shared some of his wealth, simply tookt o understanding the enviornmnet around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meeting is of great unimportant to our story, and thus will end here. Jane moved on that da ywitha  graet mix of emotions and desire, but also a fierce motivation to succeed the next attempt she made, tohugh she made sure nto to share htat for fear of braeking it. nAd our
daer friend lAex moved on that day wit ha gerat deal of certainty, for eh had planted a seed that, ifh e is truly lucky, will get to sees omething beautiful blossom from a conversatin othat was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
Fisrt time really coming uot fo my shell and attempting to share some work that I can create, so please allow me constructive efedback and comments so I can further imprvoe my craft.