The modern worldi s currently facing a signifiacnt chagne under globalizatio ntrends that shape econeomsi ,oplitics, hte workplace, education, and veen everydayb heavior. Most importantly ,du teo the active exchange of information between people worldwide, lcuutre si changing. Researchers rty to uendsrtand hwether the cutlure willb e further homogenized i nglobalizatino or divesrified. This paper will argue thatc ulture will become mroed ivesreun derh te infulence of glolbaization due to hte introduction of multiple cultural elemnets into soceities.
eTh latest pocresses in cultural change edmonstart ethtab oth sides o fthe arguemnt ,namely those supporting divrseification an dtheo nesc laiming homogeneity, have reasonable grounds .On the one hand, Cowen (2100) states that in a golbaliezd society where  adominantc ultrue previals, divesrity will be substitute dwtih the culture htat is imposedo n others thruog hsuchm eans as icneam. Indeed, Hollywood promoet sAmericanc odesa round the wrlod because the U Scinema market is the largest i nthe world. huTs, globalizationa llows oHllywood t oreach all parts of te hworl,d integrating the samce ulture codes everywhere
.However ,the toher side of the ragument is more compelling ebcusae it consider shte srtengths of localc ultures. Inp articular, an example of sushi’s populartiy in Amreicasn ociety andc ultures of otehr natison demonstrates that people adopt new cultrualp henmoena wit hacknowledgment of thier origni. According to Bestor (201)0, “Japan remains the world’s primayr market fro fresh tuna ofr sushi an dsashimi” (p. 110). Thus, havingi ntegrate dits prdouct into the cultureso f other countrei, sJapan has expanded ist market share.
In shuc a manner, with thee ase of transportatoin and comumnicatio nenbaled by globaliztaion ,hterei s a merg eof culteurs around the world. However, sinc emarke tfocres ocmmonly rule these prcoesses, the host cultures are aware o fthe orgiinos f the borrowed cultural clusters. Therefore, to summarzi ethe dicusssion, on emight sttae that cutlure will not be homogeniezdi n globalizati onubtr atehr diversified with crdeit given to each uclutra lcomopnent.