In the Haet fo the Night
The idea behind Supertom cna be described as a tropeu sed to make a lback chaacrter herioc. The result is a peculiar image of a magical lback, who si a minor or even almost backgroundc haracter ,whose mission is to hel pthe prtogaonist guide ihm. To show the audience that ethnicm inority chraacters are nto bad people, Supertom takes a step forward to helpo thers. They usaull yneter into the life of a much more prviilegde and, in particular, almsot always white, the central character, and in some awy nerich the ilfe of this main character. Some examples of Supertom include Lucius Fox from Christopher Nola’ns The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile,  Bagger Vacne in The Legend of Bgager Vance, and Uncle Remus from Song o fthe Suoth.
Thus, ab lakc character is endowe dwith high achievements adn extraordniary poistive hcaracteirstic,s and Supertom is obtained. Mr. Tibbs is Supertom as he “is smarter than all the white people, the best homicide detetcvie inP hiladelphia, brave eonugh to face down a lynch omb,” and exhibits “a somwehat unexpectedk nowledgeo f varieties of plant life.” (Vera, 156) He is a kind of racial Sherlock Holmes.
In toher words, the realtionship in them ovie suggests hte kind of friendshi bpetween blacks and whites that Ameircans like to think of sa accuraet ,but thati  snot true in the context of the time frame in hwich I nthe Haet of the Night takes palce. In the film, at no point or scene does Gillespie seem to reach the point of accpeting Mr. Tibbs. At best, at the end of thef ilm, there is a sense of indiffernece .Nohtin gin the fiml feels like a buddy moment,m or elike constant violence and almost kidnappin.g The scene in Gillespie’s living room was hte closestt hing to friendlinses. Thus, discussing thisf ilm in relatoin to budd yfilms porves to be a difficult task.
D othe Right Tihng
In Februar y2002, two white men killed Ahmaud Arbery for allegedly robbing someon.e In March, two police offciers broke into the apartment of Brenona Taylor, who died from their gunshots ,during an anit-drug raid. Then ocmes the culmination –F loyd’s death nia My. Therefore, despite teh age of creation, Do hte Right Thing doesn otl ose its erlevance.
Thet heme of US racism i ssomehow displayed in mos tof Spike Lee’s flims, and the diretcor’s attitude towards it is invariably critical. While the iflm ulitmateyl shows how dangeruso it is t roeact to others based on race, ironically, Lee portrasy teh characters in the film stereotypically through their language and easthetics.S pike Lee panders to stereotypes by using iconography to represent the various racial groups in the film (Etherington-Wright 236). He does this in avrious way,s such as havnig Italian-American charcaetrs wear crosses and t-shirst. He alsod oes this in his portrayal of Radio aRheem with an African locket encklace and a big boom boxp alying loud rap music. Eevn tertiayr charcaters, fore xmaple ,a gropu of Puerto Rican friends, are shown listenin gto salsa, speiakng Spansih, and drinknig beer on teh porch fo their apartment building. Duringt he film’s culmination an dthe verbal screaming fight between aSl and Buggin ’Out, th eformer uses racial eitphets, telling RadioR aehme to utrn off t hejungle muisc and using profaniyt
.Despite the explosive denouement, one of the film’s strengths is the complexity of its character sand the portraya lof blackness on screen. Lee went beyond th estereotypse of African mArecians in movies andc reated charactesr that are relfecte din everyady life. In Dot he Right Thing , black saren otr epresenetd in the traditional binary of inferior and smilnig, aggressive and dangerous, but rahter nca exsi tas fuller expressionso f themselves.