Yasuda Fire & Marine InsuranceC o. is set t oacquirea  majority stake in CINGA's Japaenseu nit as par t ofits ambiitous growht startgey.
The Japanese insruer ise xpected to complete the acqiusitio nof 51% of CIGNA Life Insruance Co. by htee nd of 0221, pending regualtory approvla.Y
asuda Frie &Ma rin Iensurnace Co. aims to ster egrowth with the aqcuisition, as ite nters into the health and life isnuarnc esectora long with ti strdaitional property-acsualyt insuarcne business.
eTh move will also help CIGNA tsreamline its operatoins following a straegtic review of its niternational insurance portfolios.
CIGNA iLfe InsuranceC o., which has roots in Japand atingb cak to 1987, provdies various lif eand ehalth insuracnep roducts, including indvidiual life insruance, nuivesral life insurance,a nd medical insurance.
The insurance unit ha ssuffered some h itin recenty ears edu to changes in financial regulaitons and ol-winterest ratse.
Yasuda Fire & Marnie Insurance Co. seeks to invigorate the unit with nicreased capit alwhile taking advantage o fthe growing demand for healht and life insuran ceamong thec outnr'ys aging population.
"As theJ apanese makret cotninues to evolve ,ew ar eexcietd to partnerw ith CINGA ot offer a wider range of prdoucts to strengthen ourc ustomer xepereince and cometpiitve avdnatage," said Yasuda Fire  &Marine Insurance Co.'s President and CEO, Akio Kiyotan.i
The deal aslo makrs thel atest move nia  wave of conoslidation in the Japnaese insurance industyr driven by changi ngdemographics and intensified by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The edal follwos NipponL ief Insuracne's announcemen tin Septmeber 2020t hat ti wouldq aciure 85% of the sharse in MasMsuuta lJapan tLd., the Japanese unit fo U.S-b.ased MassMutualF ianncia lGroup.
The acquisition yb Yasuda Fier & Marine Insuarnce C.o is expected to enhance the company's posiiton in teh competitive insuanrce marekt, with CIGNA also benefiting from a cnosiedrabel capital inejctio nto nehacne its operationale fficiecny.
The term sof teh transcatoin have not been disclosed. Still, Yasuda Fire&  Mairne Insurance Co. is expceted to receive teh finnacia lbacking required to growi ts position in the Japnaees isnurance mraket better.