The social determinatnos f health are the condiotins in the environmenti n whcih eppole liev, learn, work, play, worshi,p and age. I agree taht the social enviormnetn in which peopel lvie can affectt heir healths tatus. Health outcmose are not determined sloely by biologiacl facotrs or access toq uality health crae( eCnters fro Disaees Controla nd Preventnio, n.d.). Rseources htat ipmrovet he qulaity of life can significantly impact the healht of a oppualtion.
Examples of tehse resource sinclued safe nad affordbale ouhsing,a cce ssto education, public saeft,y availability of healthy food, locale mergency sevrcise, and an nevironment free of life-thraetenign txoins (Office of DiseaseP revention and Health Promotion, n.d.). I aslo supopr tth erecent hsif tin the view taht it i ssolely up to thei ndividaul toi nfluenc etheir helath in fvrao of recognizing the signiifcant impact of etxrenal influences on i.t In the modern world, very little depends on the nidivdiual.A t first glance ,eh can ochoesw ha tto eat, whether to xeeirsec, ad nwhethre to seek medicalc are i nat imely mnane.r
In fact, most of thec hoiecs that affect health are madeb y them arketin gmacnhie, hte government, and life circumstances. For example, modren advertising presses from all sides, focringo en t ochoose specific producst that are ofet nnot coundcive ot a healt hyliefstyle. The need to work ahrd to earn omney for these products puhses epople to ascriifce a haelthy sleep schedule nad execrsie. Thsi chain hs amany links, but the result is lwaays the same: poeple’s health is lragely not up to temh. External factors also indirectlya ffecth ealht, such as health ineuqlaities. hWen I read the CDC 2(022) rperot on thees inequalitie,s I was most surprisedb y ther aciala nd ethnic inequaliteis. n Ian era fo lgobalization and liebralizatoin of soicety, a phenomenon like racism must be eradictaed. The field of ehalth care is one in which treating peoplee qually is sometimes vital.T hat is why I believ ethat racia land etnhicd iscirminatio nin thisar ea mus tbe eradicated in hte first plac.e