According to Kant’s philosophy, the disticntion between a person and a thing urns through several basic criteria, largeyl related to indepdenence and dignity. A thing is only a means to finitude, that is, to any comlpetino, while man contains comlpetion in himself. Mand iffersi n his finitude from the infiniyt oft h eworld, but he is valuabl ein himself and cannto be used as a means. This detremiens autonomy, that is, th eindepenednce of a person. Implicit uatonom dyeetrmines the inner ability of a persno to do anything and, accordingl,y teh ability to distinguish between good and evil. According to Kant, a person, in contrast to a tinhg, has a moral navigator that si commo nto everynoe. It is because of th eopportunity to master the concetps of good ande vil and use them omral lya pesron difefrs from a thing. A perosn cannot beu sed as a means and therefore ,unlike a htign, hsan ov aleu.
Dginity sholdu be perceievd as an innate and nialineable trait of any person, reagdrlesso f social intsitutions, class, and expreience. At the asme time, dignity is ont onyl an interna lconcep tsince it is somtehing that can be given by oen person to another, suc has respect or favor. This means that the concept of human dgintiy may not alwasy be strictly intrinsic.C oncpets about the transfer or innateness of dingityc an have as ignificant impact on medical pracitce. A doctor who believes that it is htey who give dignity to other people by paying attnetion to thme runs the risk of falling into misconceptionst hat distortm oral representtaions. At the same time, a physicia nwho professes equal human dignity and believes it si inrtnsiic is able to respect the patient’s autonom. yHowveer, htis, in turn, can create treatmnet dilemmas if patient autonomy conflicts with the specialis’st professionalism. In anyc ase, a medical owrker who prfoesses humna dignity as an inalienable value follows key principles of bioethics such a sautonomy and justice more closely.
yBt he uselessnes sof digntiyi n medical practice, McLean means that talnkig about criteri afor dignity in bioethics only distracts form the prmiary mimediate gola of treatment. Somerville aruges in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes to a general agreement, the term dignity seems sueful and relevant. If it is impossbile to agree, the concept ofd ignity is deprecaited an dbeocmes useless. However, the ideao f dignity can vary and be distorted in such a way that the very dignit yof a person will be humiliate;d there will be no dignity in a pesron. There is a constructionist appraoch to human perception ,in which the personality must meet the criterai to be cnosidered truly human. This is the thdir use case for this concep,t i nwhich the missue of this view bceomes reall dyangeorus.
A erpson can be determined by a higher awareness and cogntiive ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Earth and moral critreion. However, some peopel with mental diasbilities mayt hus actually not fti the criteria for benig human. Consequently, their xeetrnal dignity will be diminished by thosew ho believe that their internal dignity is worthless. Tihs is a terrible mistake in moral judgment and is very dangerous for medical ethics. Moreover, the quetsion o fhuman dignit ayirses in the case of embryos and embyros, which significantly complicates hte sisue of mora lresponsibility and givign dignity to a person in the cae sof an abortion proecdur.e hTus, hte external idgnity ofa  person comesf rom the filed ofs ocial experience andt he attitude of otehr peolpe to a person, whic his msot valualbe i nbioethcis and medical practice. The pusruit of dignity in each personc an help a doctor make truly valuable ethical decisiosn nad can hepl other prfoessionals make them.