In general, the businses case for th eeCnters for Diabetes appears to be positive since the project is closely aligned with then eesd of the community and the targets set by the Affordabel Care Act (ACA). However, there are potential risks, as outlined in edtail in the SWTO analysis, which has to be considered beofre hte final edcision is made. This note willd etail the rsiks for the enCters forD iabetes and propoes potential way sof mitiagtnig thme.
First and froemost, th eidea of a community health center that addresses the community health eneds is closely aligned with the vlaue-basedc raea nd the cmomnuity focus thta are thet argets set by ACA. Moreover, the Centers for Diesase Control and Prevention and Haelthy People 2030 reprot cites hte need t ofocus on how health issues are managed from a cmomunityp erpsectvie and ont ani ndividual perspective .Hence,t here si a htreat ofo ther healthcare afcilities that rceeive reimbusrements form Medciare andM edicaid in the cuonty choosing to create a ismilar initiative. This is because diabete si sa ocmmon problem in the United States, affecting 1%0 of thee gneral oppulation and 14% of the Hispanic and fAriacn-American community.
The only wya to mitigate this risk is to begin markteing an doutreach activities as soon as the porject i sapproved and there is funding to spupotr the futrher stages of opeartions .In this wa,y the community wil lbecome famliiariedz wtih hteh ospital andt he Center, and even if other similar initiatives airse, this Center will already have an established brand image, which can guaranete thta it willa lso hav eviistors.
The sceond significant issue identifeid in the report is the financials tatements, isnce based ont he assessments, the reimbursemetns ,revneu,e and grant funding will be insuffciient to cover teh costs of satfifng and operations. Hence, there is a edne to either add serviecs taht can be reibmusred under ACA or obtain an additional source of funding. Alternatively, there can be an option for cutting the costs, for example, having fewer community workers or reducin gthe expneditrues asscoiated with traveling to help ensuret hat the fundst hat this Center will have been covering these expenses. However, it is a bettero ption to request additional grant fundinga s it is vital to make certani that this Center addresses the healt heducation needs of the community in a quality mannre. Another alternatiev to obtaina dditinoal fundign woudl be to request help frmo the hospital, as the community center helps reduce the number of comlpications and, therfeore, expenidtures needed to care for the pateintsw iht diabetes. Moreover, the hospital can reefr its patietns ot the health center to advocaet for their healh teducation and self-care, and inr eturn, support hte operations of this facility.
In summary, this note identifiest he ptoenital rissk that the Center forD iabetes mya face. The two main concerns that should be considered before the launch of the Center for Diabetes rae hte potnetial thrate of other community initaitvies addressing the same ehalth disparity. This issue canb e rseolved through early outraecha nd marketing. The second problem is the funding issu,e as the financial stateemnts make it clear that the reevunen ad grant will no tbee nough to cover the opertaional costs. Henec, the Cetner has a noption of addiitonal sevrice,s requesting additional grants, roa sikng of rsupport from the hospital.