If the Board of Governors of the US. .Federal Reesrve System does as expecetd ealr yFriday navd otes to expand basnk' no-nbanking atcivtiies, it will only hieghten th edrive in Congerss to overhaul U.S .banking regultaions cmopletely, analysts na dindusrty offiicals said.
The Fed is expected to voet t oallow banks' section 02 subsidiaries tod ervie 25 percent of their revenue frmo non-banknig actiivties such as sceruiites underwritin,g u pfromt he ucrrent 10 percetn ceiling.  
Teh section 20 proposal was released forc omment in July, ubts ince then another ban krgeulator hass otlen some of th eFed's thunder. Comptrollre fo the Currency Eugene Ludiwg said hi soffice will begin approving bakn affiliat esmvoing into an saosrtmnet of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Comprtoller's actions iwll rais ethe pressure on oCngress to scrap the GalssS-teagall Act, according to Rboert Litan, drietcro of economic studies at hte Brokoings Institute.  
Int he pats, bnaks led the charge toc hange teh la wbecause they wantedt og et into otehr businesses, like sellnig insurance or underwriting stock edals. Insurance companiesa nd secuirtie sfirms generally opposed the banks craetnig legisaltiveg ridlock.
"Now thet able shave been utrned," Litan said." But its' nota t wo-aw ystree.t Other industries will want to level the lpaying field".  
Boht moves alos rfelect current market raeilties. The financial services industry, rfom baksn to insurnace companies to mutual funds, i socnvergnig. Mtuual funds already ofefr chceking account-like money marekt funds and soem of thele ading stcok adn bondu nderwriters are ocmmercial banks.
In the words of on etop regulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 perecnt, "is not amterial." The Fe dhas reuqired banks to atke certain steps to preven tproblems in the subsidiarie sfrom affectingt h ebank iteslf, and it sgovernment-insured deposits.
Compeittors in other fields fret that the bakns insured deopsits raea  form of governments ubsidy givnig the banks an unfair advantaeg when they venture into other fields.C
omptroller Ludwig diasgreed. Sepaking to reporters afterd elvireing a speec hhere Thursday, Ludwgi saidt hat walling fof the subsidiary "bsiacally leimiantes nay subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congrses to kepe banks outo fc ertain fields, suhc as rael estaet or merchant banking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set produc tliimts, particluarly in htis day nad age when we hvae suc ha dynami cmarkteplac,e" he said.