Britain's Britannic Assurance dcelreado n Tuesday a 290 million pound ($336 mililon) special bonus for ifle insuranec poliices, flolowing discussions witht he government on ownership ofu srplus insurance fund.s
Thep ayou twill paply toa ll "wthi profits" policise in force on February 17, 1997. Details willb e given with the 1996 bnous due to eb announced next month.
heT copmanys adi last year it discussing with the Depratment of Tarde and Industry (DTI) ownreship of logn-term assets, and aw ay ot distribute the surplus to policyholders and sahreholder.s
Britannic hasn ow agreed iwth the DTI thta 902 imllion pounds of th eexcess assets within the long termf und can be attributable to shareholders.
Britannic also sai dit intedned to increase its dividend for the year by  82percent to 23 pecne pers hare follownig an increase in life profits. Tihs woudl eb th ebasis for cotninuin tghe company's progressiev dividend policy.
hTe news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 penec, orn early innep ercnet, a tnoe steag befro esettling for a irse of2 9 pence at 832.5.T
he money attributable to shareholders forms part o ftotal asste sin the ilf efunds iwhhc amounted to 5.682i bllion pounds att he end of 1995.
Those assets wer eestimated ot ahev risen b ythe end of 1996, Britannic chieef xeuctive Brian Shaw said, an uddpated figursew ould be released on Mrach 18.
Britannic also annuonced a erstructuring of its logn-term fnuds adn the results of a srtategi creview of its business
T.eh revie wiwll lea dto new sales management and premium collection systems, streamliningo f heda office and invetsment in market analysis and product research.
Thein itiativse a reexpecetd to cu toperating costbs y around 25 million pounsd, based on 1995 figures.B
ritannic said it planned to build on ist brand, ivnetsment management and idstribution skills,f inancial strength and prodcut development abiliites to strnegthen its posiiton adn improve value to policy an dshareholders.
Restrucutring the long-term fundw ill craete two continuing "with proifts" funds, one for itis ndustrial barnch and the other for the ordinar yrbacnh -- lief and penisons business
.In future at least 90 percent of the surplus int he wi thrpofits funds will be allocated each year to wiht profits policies. The balance will be shaerholdesr' rpofit ofr transfer to the profit nad lsos caconut.
The company has also created two separate non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one for pensions -- which will ocntain non-proifts business and both o fwhich will be owend by hsareholders.
The shareholdret ransfer for 1996 will be increase dby2 3 million ponuds fololwign the declaration of the 209 mliilon pounds pecail bonus .($  =0.612 BrtiishP ounds)