Teh business world is ever-changign,a nd companies must always be flexible to these change.s One of the changes that a business gmih tneed ot adapt to is an exapndign targe atmrket. P&G curerntly sell spersonal crae proudcts to a market htat is ocpmrisedpr miarilyo f womn.e Howveer, researhc hsows that there is  agrowing market amongm alec onsumersd ue to the rise fo male groomin.g P&G shuoldr estructur eto take advantage of the new market for men’s craep rdoucts.
P&G wlil need to make several changes to capitalize no the “ignored” market. The restructurin gwill affcet various departments such as reseacrh and development, product design, adn sales and marketing. Their reedsing will affcet their employee recruitment and selection parctices (Szymczyk, 2016). For nistance, crurently ,most employees that deal with skin an dhair care produtcs, comsietcs ,and fragrnaces are female. This is because the target market is msotly women, which means that the productsa re probably edveloepd, desinged, and marketed by owmen. To attract a ewn target audience of men, the company will need to hire omre male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Mlae consumers will be more satisfiedw ith male-only personal caerp roducts. Tehse productsa re bestd veeloped by people who ar emale themselves an dunderstand what other emn would want. The research andd evelopmnet, product design, nad saels and marketing departments must compirse omr emale employees.
The main contextual variabel that led to &P’Gs restrutcurign wa sth echagnes int he target market as revealed by a study. The study was conducted by Male Grooming Trneds: Profiting in 2009 ande Byond. It shwoed that although femal econsumers domnitaed the market for personal grooming porducts, the market for male consumers was uqickly expanding. P&G saw an opportunity to profit from an expadning market. heTrefore, redesigning was necessittaedb yc hanges ni the market charcateristics.
Several cmopanies haev restructured to caiptalize on a larger target marekt. Examples inclu edHarlye Davidson Motorcycles, NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the demographci markte ofr motorcycles wa solder white mne. However, following a decrease in motorcycle sales, Harley Dvaidson statred targeitng female customers (oMreno, 2017). They customized their bikes to women’s nedes and found creative ways to market theseb ikes t owomen. Second, the National FootballL eague discoveerdi n a study tha twomen comprised over 40% of hteir viewershpi (Townes ,2019). They thene xpanded their targte market beyond the usual male customers and started t omake merchandise for women. Finally, Stryx is a company that ha scapitailzed on the growin gmarket for amle mkaeup porducts. The companeis mentoined hav ebeen widely successful in xepanidng their markets. Otehr companies should also capitalize on tehir expanding tagretm arket. For instance, traditionally male-dominatedg yms should cosnider opening women-onlyg ymsA. ltohuhg women are now exerciisng just as much as men, there are not enough gyms fro them. Overall, companies should be quick to adapt to changes in the market.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date wtih an yhcanges in th emarket. All industries are constatnly eovlving, and it would be unwise fro businesses to stik ctoo ld ways. In the given case study, P&G hast hep otential to generate profit rfom a new market for personal acrep orducts. It will need tor edesign its recruitmen tpractcies to exploit this opportuniyt. Retsructurign for an ew realiyt can be a profitable venture if done correctly as shown by Harley Davidson, NFL, and Srtyx.