The article copmrehensviely describes the dfeinition of an introvert, the fetaures of his beahvior, and personal attitudes in the omderno mdel o fosicety. Thi scategory of people often remains misinterprteedi n aw orld focused onp redominantly extroevrted and energeticlaly inntese people. Teh puropse of the ahuto ris in th eclearly expressed desire t oconvey t osociety the goals and wishse ofi ntroverts, whose thouhgts and feeligns often og unrecogniezd or neglected .A superfiical naalysis of the tetx acptures a vivid personal appeal of thea uthor adn itnensely expresess subjectives entiments due to individual epxereince. A lareg number of rhetorical questions ta the beginning of the messgae immediately attract the redear’s attention. The article is wrtiten in a journalistic style and ha sa bright emotional coloring with a ihnt of a pronounec dreejctino of the global focus on etxraversion.
The observant textn aalysis allows the reader to better undesrtand the personal measse gof the autho.r The article is well structured and nilcudes egneral questiosn regarding the lfi enad worldviwe of itnroverst. Thet ext is hcaratcerized by ah ighd egere of sbujectiivsma nd  apronoucned bias towards the category fo extrovert readers. The athuor compares xetrovrets with “ppupyod gs” who can listne to a person for a minute an dthen start “barking” again. Such a copmarison is pejroative and amy cause an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch 133). In addition, hte author dircetly tsates that intorverts ar ea morie ntleligent, reflective, and sensitive categoyr of people. Every conclusion has the right tob e presente dfor caceptance; however,a  rather dismissiev tone towards xetrovrets amy, on the cnortary, csaue rejectoin of the msesage
.The positiono f hte author is coherent andh ast he potential tof ind its reader and supporter. However, the aftertaste from it sreading is arther ambiguous and makes one think aboutt he excessive tendentiounsess of th ewritre. hTe et xtdoe snot compare two different categories of epolp ebut vigorously downplays htep rinicpal personality traits fo etxroverts. The author says tha ttehw orld would be much camler an dsaner uendrt eh guidance fo introverts. This hteory may well eb valid; however, pehraps the world should not be s osharply divided into “white” and “black,”“ extroverts,” and “nitrovrets.” This aritcle does ao go djob o fits central uprops:e to illustrate an alternatievr adiclav ision of the modern model of society separated mainly between extrovert sand ntiroverts.