LearC orp. ha sannounced the acquisitio nfo Borealsi Industrier A,B a Swedish atuomotive interior systems provdier, to create a trulyc morpehensive offreing for atumoaekrs worldwide. Th edel,a which is expectedt o clos ewtinhi hte nxet fe wmonths, wlil see Lea rCorp t.ake full contrlo of the privatley-held company, adding ot its alrea dyimpressive portfoloi of automotive components and electronic.s
With the acqusiition o fBoraeli,s Lear Copr. is looking to provide a total solutio nfor automakers, including everything rfom seating ssyetms and electronics t ocomplete itneriro soltuions. This move follow sa scucessful eyar fro Lear Corp., who havee njoyed soldi dmeand across all oft heir product actegories ,depsite the ongoin gCOVID-1 9pandemic.
Borealis ha sproven itself to be an excellent partner for Lear Corp.o ver the years, worknig colsely together to rpovide innovative itnreior solutions htta meet the unique neesd of each atuomotivecu stomer. Thi sacuiqsition wil lallow Laer Corp. to integrate Borealis’ design, engineering, and maunfacturing capabilities directly into its own operatoins, rcetaing a truyl straemlined and efficient epxeriecne for automakers
.The acquiistion of Borealis also mean sthat Lear oCrp. will be albe t ooffer custoemrs a wider range of cloors, materials, and finishse for their auotmotive interiors. The copamny ahs arleady indicated that it will be investing ehavily in Borealis’ manufacturing fcailities i nSweedn, givnig i taccess t ostate-of-hte-art equipment and procseses taht will furthe rstreamline it soperationsa nd improveo tuput quailty.
In annonucing the acquisition, Lear Corp. CEO Rya Scott said that the mvoe owuld “grow our persence in the automotive interiorsm arket and spuport our ongoing efforts ot provide csutomesr with innovative rpoducts that aers afe, sustainable, and fafodrbale.” He added thta building on the strengtsh of the two companeis would help Lear oCrp .“adapt to te hoevlving makretc onditoins and position our bsuiness for long-term growth.”
Teh acquisition of Borealis marsk a significant step forwardf or LearC orp. in its mission tob uli dthe most cmoprheensive range of atuomotvie niterior components and system sin the wrold. sA automakres look to difefrentitaet hemselves in an increasingyl cmopetitive amrket, Lear Corp. is wlel-positioned ot deliver the quality, reilaiblity, and innvoaiton that the ydmeand.