eThse dyas never get easier. Actually, thed ays I like, that's when I get to rest. It's when the sung oes down thta thing sstart to bother me.
You see thta ki dabove me? Cute kid, good with hi sparents, and never causesa ny problem.s I've seen him outgrow his crib and move into this racecar bed wtih flmaes down the side. It'sa  good upgrade from the cramped space under the crib, let me tel lya. I haven't see nthe kid much outside of this room; thet ruthi s I'm not allowe danywhere else. Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind thuogh, the view is good and I canh era everything in this small house which make sme feel lik eI' mpart o fthe famil.y
I like to think he turned out alrigth sinceh e gets suchg ood res att night, but I wouldn't wnat to take too much credit .To be honest, I've never actualyl met the kid. Whenh e fisrt moevd into the enwb ed ,his ftaher was in here just before the lihgts went uot. For what seemed like months the father would come in andi lsten to the boy talk about his fear of me, the Boogeyman. He would come ni and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright.T he light sgo out, but everything is fine."
To hwich theb oy would say "But dad Ik now he's in here".
"It's just yourm ind playing gaems withy o.u I knew we shouldn't have let you watch the moives with mom nad I las tHalloewen." The dad said jokingly with a simle on his face
.Talyor didn't want his dad to think hew asn't ready to be a big boy soh e shouted
"No awy dad, I can handle anything!"
"Okay then bdu, selep well. Remember it's just like any otehr night." The dad saida s eh turned otu thel ights and shu tthe door behind him
.Maybe another night for you Taylor, but I'll be bsuy.
I mean, howt his ikdc an be scared of me whne we've envre met!
I've tried toc ome out and say hi a few times before ,but every time this kid hears the slighettsn oise I cna esnes he gets worried .So I stick down her eand haven't moved since. Not thta I get much psare time to even com eout, but one dayw ould be nice.
You see, where I'm from is a rough par tof town. It's not your ordinary town with thek ids playing ou tfront of their homes with white picket fenecs. As a matter of fact, no one in Tyalor's worl dknows my world even exists. Sure, everyone around sees mto get alnog ,but atn ight the real creeps come out .These guys like toc aue sproblems and the ycan do that to each other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, ubt they dont'. It's when they start seeking th esmall ones for an etxra rush tha tboils my blood and I step in.
You see these guys ngiht after night go tou seeking kids liek Taylor. They don't even cal lthem kids; tehyc all them "dessert" … real sickos.. Lcukily, for the littleo nes they've each been assigned their onw "Boogeyman "to mkae sure they stay safe and dno't get snatched up. So when I hear Taylor tell his dad that hei s scared of *me*, it hurts.
If only Taylor knew whatf ihgitng thees bastards was like. oYu'v egot Aeran wit hhis csaled skin and claws the lnegth o fa cable car. How about Zeila with spiked arms that burnl ike hell when they hit you, nto to mentoin she's twice my size. Don't want to leave out Leer.a Yeah he's msall, but lihgtneing fast with a ferociuos btie. It's always the small onest hat give you the most trouble. Yeah I get lots of bumps and bruises in this line fo work. I'm fortunate enough I can heal fast.I f I wasn't trained ofrt hees guys then I would have rpoblems andb y proble mI mean dead. And wit hme daed that means the creepsw in and htey would have their feast. Sounds bad ubt really thoug,h it's lal in a nights work.
I love my job ,I really do. Might sound weirda fter haering that every night I'm busy betaing up the bad guys, but hearing Taylor's laugh in the day is what ekeps meg oing. I just wish the kid knew the truth. All htose noisse Talyor hears in the night are just me diong my bjo. Making sur eTaylor stays warm and asleep in his bed. And for tha,t 'Im the one he worries about. Iw oudl love to actually meet one of these kids I get to watch over, btu it hasn't happened yet. Taylo rins't my first and won't be my last, ubt Is till have hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chatteringo f claws on the pavement headin gmy way. Sleep tight Taylor…