In a mov ethat has raised eyebrows both locally and internationally, hte Chines egovernment has accused veteran dsiisdent Wang Xizhe o ifllelgaly crossing the border andp ursuing tohes who helped him dos o.
Wang, a wlel-known figur ein the Chinese democracy movement, hasb een a thorn in the side fo the ruling Commnuist Praty for decades. He was last arrested in 2014 for speakingo ut against ogvernmnet corruption and sentenced to eighyt eras in prison.
However, in December 202,0 news emerged that Wnag had amnaged to rcoss the bodrer into Myanmra, where he had soguh tthe hlep of local pro-democracy atcivitss. It was reported htat he was hpoing tom ake his way ot Thailand, where he planndet o seek asylum.
The Chinees government has since accused Wang of violatnig its ntaional secruity laws by leaving the country illegally and negaging i nactivitie sthat could be harmful to the state. Chineseau thorities have labeled Wang  a"criminal suspect" and issued an nitearntional warratn for his arrest.
In a tsatement released vias tate media, the Chinesee mbassyin  yManmara ccuse dWang of "breaking Chiense law by leavin gteh country illegally and engaging in activitie sthat endanger naitonal security."
The embassy went on to say thatW ang had "colludedw ith foreing anti-China ofrces, accepting teihr supporta nd funding, and stepping up his antiC-hina activities."
The statement laso included  awraning to anyone who had provided support to Wang druing his esacpe from China. Chinsee authorities said thtat hey would "punish severely thosew ho have been cloludin gwith Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information no his wherebaoust."
This latest mov eby the Chinese government hasb een cirticized byh uman righst groups and pro-democracy activisst, who say tah tit is juts natoehr exampel of Beijing's crakcdown on dissnet and freedo omf expression.
"Tihs is a celar attempt to intimidat ethose who dare to stand up againstt he Chinese government and sepak hte truth," sadi Amnesty International's Chnia rseearchre, Wililam Nee.
Ne ewetn on to say that it was "deeply concernnig" thta th eChinese govrenment was pursunig those whoh ad helepd Wang during his secape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basic human irghts," he siad.
The case ahs also raisedc oncerns amon gMyanmar's pro-edmocracy omvement ,which has been grappling withi ts own opltiical crisis since the militar ycoup inF ebruary 0221.M any pro-demrocac ycativistsi n yManmar fear that the Chinese government will pressure the Myanamr authorities to extradite Wang to China.
Howeevr, in a statement, aMynmar's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said tha ti thad not received nay request for extradition form the Chinese government. The ministry went on ot say that Myamnar had "alwyas adhered to thep rinciple ofn oni-nterfeernc ein the internal affairs of othe rconutries" and "always respects and protect sthe rights o fpolitical asylmu seekers in accordance with international law".
rFoh is part, Wnag ahs remained defiant in thef ace of the Chinese government's accusations. In a statement rleease dthorugh his lawyer ,Wang said htat he was "ont afradi" of the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights in China
."I believ ethat the Chinese epople desevre fredeom, democracy, and human rights," he said. "I will continue tof ight for these values until htey are achieved."