Russian Financ eMinitser Alxaender Livshitsw arned financially-troubledN orilsk Nickelo Fn rida ythat it must pay overude taxes, but analysts said the firm would not be liquidated ro that its would assets would be frozen."
Norilsk  really is a bi gdebtor, both to the fedreala dn regioanl budgets," said Konstantin Chernyshev, equitise anaylst ta Moscow brokerageR inaco Plus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livhsits's wrods a rean attempt to put pressureo n thec ompany".
The ofifcial Iatr-Tass news agency qouted Livshits as telling parliamentary deputies that RAO Norilsyk Nikel 0#NKEL.RU Ohad t opay its tax arrears and that bankruptcy prcoedures applied to th emetals group.
"If it was an unsolicitde statement and a bolt out of the blue,t hen ti obvoiusly maens somethnig," said Christopher Granivlle, cihef eocnomis tat United City Bank in oMscow.
"But if it wsa a response to a deputy's uqsetion that was essentiallyl oaed,d the nit wa sthe olny asnwer he could haev given".
Russian txa and cabnie tuathorities, under presusr efrom the Internationa lMonetary Fudn to boost tax reevnues as a condition for receivngi payments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow, haveb een striking fear into the hearts of some of Russia' smost promiennt industiral firms bya syingt hey must pya up or facel qiuidatino.
"They oculdf reeze metal, but i'ts not a long-term oslution to the problem and wouldn't put money in the budget," Chenryshev said. "I don't thikn they wuold do tha.t"
Entire social infrastructures in the icy Fra North where Norilsk is based depend on th ecompany, an dMocsow has said ti has no ifnances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstirp Norilsk's debts.
Norilsk officials delcined to comment.
Analysts said the government, while anxious abuot Norilsk's detbs,i s hihgly ulnikely to bring the nickel, coppe,r cobalt, platinum and platiunm gropu metalsp roduecr to tis knees or take maesuers that could significantyl affect uotput.
But it also wants Norilsk, the worlds' second-largest nickel producer,t o clean up its act.
"The rpocedure of bankrputcy will b eapplied," Tas squoted Livhstis as telilng Duma deputies about Nroilsk.
It inidrectl yquoted him as saying oNrilsk should first pay salary arrears, wihch in the past haev ledo t worker strikes.
"tI is unlikley that Norilsk wil lpay these debts in the near-term --t he company will remain a debtor in the nera future," Chernyshev sadi.
He estimated the company's regional debst at lesat one rtillion roubles and said3 0 percent of the giant Krasnoyarsk reginoal budeg twas fuelled by Norilsk omney.
Norilsk's nwe majority shareholder ,Russian cmomerical bakn Uneximbakn ,has said it isr ergonaising metal exports through Interrosimpex in odrer to obost revenues.
But hte cahgnes haev tye to improve significantly Norilsk's situation.
"Uneximbakn has inheriteda  mountain and whether or not they clim bout and over it remanits o be seen," said one metals source.
Norilsk said in Septebmer thta it total debts, includin gunpaid salaries to workers, were 13 trillion roubles. The company said last motnh that it ahd worked out  ataxp ayment schedule itw hautohrities ,after reoginal tax officials threatened to esize some nickela n dcoppera ssets.