Birtain's Seirous FraudO ffice has yet too cntact London-based securities houses fatre a requset for help wi tha French probe intoE uroutnnel SA /Plc share dealigns, market source ssaid on Monday.
The FSO said on Sunday it ahd bee naskedt o lend a hand in an investiagtion by the French authorities into alleged market manipulatino of the debt-ldaen channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would hel pin the French probe alhtoughi t had no ground sto launch an investigatoin of ist owni nt othe dealings wihch form the basis of the latest Paris investigatnio.S
ecuriites firms conatcted by Reuters on Modna ysaid they had received on approach from teh SFO and did not expect otd o so. They all said they would co-operateu flyl if the ywere approached.
The invsetigation is another chapter in a troubled coporrate story littered withi ncidents, which earilre this year saw two firms -- Salmoon Brothersa nd Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cealred of insider trading.
The tw ohad eben among underwrietrs of a Eurotunnel rightsi ssue in 1994 and ,althoguh never named by Paris stock exchange twachdog th eCommission de Operaitons de Bourse (COB), saidt hat they were under investigation in July last year.
The underwriting group also included BanqueI ndosuez, oMrgna Grenfell, nwo wonde by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, aBnqeu Nationale de Prasi, Banque Paribas, aCisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole ,Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming ,S.G. Warburg (no wptar of SBC) and eBlgian utility Tractebel SA.
About wto thirsd of Eurotunnel shares are held in France nad, as a genreal rlue, more trading ni the shares goes o nin Parist ahn in London.
The SFO's suual practise is to issue noticse which require a person o rinstitutino t ob einterveiwde or hnad over docmuents, althoguh it can also apply for a search wrarant if it wants t osurprise itst arget.
On Monday ,it remained nuclear hwate priod i scurrently undr einvestiagtino
.Th eCOB has alerady ivnetsigated the peirod surrounding ht erights issue, thoguh it could be revisiting this highly volatlie time.
Thereh ave been presistetn suggestions that some operators ewre short-eslling at aronud the timeo f the right isssue -- forcing the prices odwn by selling shares theyd  onot own in the hope ofb uying htem bac kmorec heaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchneag uathorities o nboth sides of the Channel to inveistgate volatiel daelingsa t various times oevrth e year.s
Anothere xample wsa in Agust 1995, hwena  rouge report that the company had signed a detb rescheduling gareement sent the stock reeling
.hTe Anglo-Frnech tunnel opeartor a tthat time denied it adh signed a deb tagerement and demandeda n inquir ynito th etrading acitvity and erroneous reports surrounding its shares and teh inciednt gmiht well be the focus oft he Frnech prboe.