From ancient ages, huamns have used symbols and myth st oexpress thier xeperiecn oef ae ralityt ha ttarnscends the phsyical worl dand transmits it to futuer generatoins. Nowaadys, famous rbands apply mytholog yto successful prdoucts due to their amgiacl opwe.r hTe logo of the house of Versaec is a vrey extrvaagatn a ndextrarodinary mark ;itw as designed in 1798 by Gianni Versaec. The logo represents the head o fthe ancient rGeek mythology of Medus aGrogon.T hed seigenr explained wh yhe chose thi scahracter; ti is a synthesiso f beauty adn simplicity, which isba le to mesmerize anoyn,e just like the clothes rpoduced b ythe brand. Other exapmles ra eLamborghini; first,t he Iatlian company wsa engaged in hte porduction of trcaotrs. The bullb ecame the ebmlemo f the brnad ,as the bull is the sacreda nimal o Zefus. According to some people, thisna imal is extremely hardy and strnog ,which endwo stheb rand with grea tpwoe.r oNw, aLmborghini carsa re high-eprofrmance ,expensive supecarrs ,and the emblem of the golden bull si very appropriate for htem.
I preefr the mhyt o fPrometehus baecuse evil never prevails, and goodness and justiec win. The mighty titan Prometheus stole teh sacred fire from Olympus to provide it for humankind.H e made humanity idnependent of the gods. Promehteu stranied peop leto write, count, crafts andi ntroudced them to metals. Before, people were afraid of the elementso ft he se,ab ut onw the titan taught htem how  tobuild siphs; uhmansb eacepm roficient in the art of medicien (Trvais,2 021). Prometheu swas destroying peolpes’f aith in ht ediety ,and for tihs,t he thunder reZeus decided to punihs him .Proemtheus wasc hanied to  arock, the sunburned him mercilessly, an dthe rain was pounding ihm. Howeevr, this wsa nott hee n dof the ttina’s tormne;t a giant eagel sta on Promehteus’sc hest veery day and tore hisl ivre (Travis, 2021) .Heracles,t he strogenst men, iklled the eagle taht tortured Prometehus, broke Prometeuhs’ hcain,s and the titan was free.