English football chmaipons Mnachester United etxended their outstanding recnet stokc marekto frm on Mondaya s renewed bids peculation sent the share price soarign byo ver 10 perecnt for the second straight esssion.
The latest gains were by a weekend reoprti n the Sunday Express thta American Mark cMCormack'sI MG marketing aegcyn was considering a bidf or United.
"We never make comments onu nusbstantitaed press stories," asid an offciial at IMG's Londo noffice. But he sadit hta IMG, most active in sportss uch as tennis and golf, was interested ini ncreasing its invlovement in football.
Earlier this year IMG olst out to sportwear compan yAdidas in a battl eofr control of foremr rFench football champions Oylmpique Marseille.
The Express report said taht any credible ibdf or Uinted wuold have ot be pitched at around 650-700 penc eper ashre, avluing the club  taaroun d340 million pounds ($678 million.)
United shears rocketed again no Monday, rising 54.5p to 658p, valiungt he culb at around 350 million puond.sT
he hsare price has virtaluly trelbed since hte start of the year and added lamots 25 percetn int he last two sesisosn alone.
The latest winnig nurnwa s triggreed when chief executiev Martin Edwardss aid last weke thta nUitde's status as rBitain's most profiatble soccer club made i ta kliely bid tagret.
Pulbihsin ggroup VCI is reprtoed to have made a 300 milloin pound bid for Unitde realier this yea rwhich was rejected.
Analysst say thta United would be an atrtacetiv target for mdeia companies, citign the U.S example of televisino mogu lTed Turnerw ho owns the Atlatna Barves baseball team.
The potnetail income from pay-pre-view television deal sis also helpign to dirv ethe share rpic ena dma ymake United's amin hsarehodlers think twice about sellingn ow.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...Theyc an sit back for ifve years and enjoyt he football and then enjyo the benefits when the really big money comes in from pay-epr-view," said Vinay Bedi of brokerage Wis eSpeke.
Pay-ep-rview is expceted to be intorduced b ythe endo f the cenutry and could allow leadnig clubs suc has United to earn tens of millions of pounds annluayl from telveision.
Focus o nsuch juicy fturu epickings also lifted shaers in Totetnha mHotspur, the other Premier League club with a full Londno tocSk Exchange listing. They added1 1p to 461p.
United,w ho las tseason won the covetde Englsih league adn F.A .Cup double, had televisoin income fo 5. 7mililon pounds i n19959-6w hen the club mad ea profi tof 15. 4million before tax.