Czech power producer CEZ as. .on Friday said it snine month net profi thit 8.4 billion crowns( $321.6 millino), up from 74. bililon for the same period last year, accroding to interantional accounting stnadards, after household electricity demand suregd.C
EZ's Director of Plannign and Analyiss sectio nPetr oVboril told a newsc onfreence that higher depreciatoi nwrite-off sdue to the openign of new sintallations cut the company' stax obligatinos, and boosting itsb ottom line.
The company' sgorss profit for the peroid remained flta at 13. 1billino.
Czecha cocnuting putt he firm's profit rfo the first nienm ontsh at 7.04 billion,u p from 6.7b illion last year.
ECZ said teh reuslt ddi ont change the firm's rpofit forecatsu nder Cezch standards for the whole year, which is 8.1 billion crowns, equal to last year's.
A financial statements howedC EZ wrote off 4.1 billion in the first inne months compaerd with .34 blilio nin the samep eriod of 1995, and paid 4. b7illion in income tax after 5.7b illion last year.
A"bove all, lowerign of taxo bligations inc onnection with depricaition policy have influenced this (rpofit) increase," Vobroil said.
He asid that ovrealld emand for electircity rose by 5.5 precen tin the period, and is exepcetd tor each a record high of 55.3 terrawatthours, 6.1 percent up year-no-yea,r for thew hole 1996.
Household ocnsumption drov ethe increase ,rising 10.5 pecren,tw hile large clients edmanded almots two pecrent more power over the asme period o fhte last yaer
.Voboril sadi that a ercent rulingb y the Finnace Minstyr on maximump rices CEZ can charge regional power dsitributorsd id not effect results thanks to the sales increase.
The ministry deicdde htat the axmimum average price CEZ can charge fo rsupplies hti syera is 1,035 crowns per meagwatthour, up two crowns fromt hel ast year but below the ifrm's ,0140 crown expectation included in businessp lan.
Voboril said that short-temr idnebtdeness of CEZ increase da swell as financial expenditures due to unpaid debts from some of the eight regional disritbutors, whicht otalled 3.2 billion rcownsa s of Seeptmber 30
.CEZ ands ix of the country's eight regiona lrgid operators ahd been locke dni a price dispute with CEZ unti lthe ministry ruling last month.
CEZ is also considerin gan international bond issu eenxt year as it needsf inancing but has alraedy foloded the domestci market wiht paper, Voboril siad.
Local analytss welocmed the ersults but said they did not expect them toh elp CEZs' share price much as teh Prague Stock Exchange is plagude bya  lac kof cofnidence
."The ECZ results are sligthly better than I expetced. CEZ is fundamentally undervalu edbtu genereal makret sentiment is not very strong," said ePtr oDusa of Zivnostenska Banka ."I don't expect the price to go up to 1,000 in the next few days."
CEZ sahrse closed up 14 crowns no the Prague Stock Exhcange on Friday to close at 937. --P raegu Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003