The U.S.g overnment's top Asia official, Winston Lord, wsa to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Ministre Liu Huaqiu in eiBijng on a rnage of iusses including human rigths, idploamts said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of Statefo r Esat Asian nad Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuedsay fro the unannounced visit an daws keeping a lo wprofile while in Beijing, a U.S. embasys official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreig nMinistre Liu and a possible meeting with oFreign Minister QianQ cihen was on the agenda befroe Lord left on Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, StateD epartment spokemsan Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday htat Lord was praepring for a visit ntexm onth by Secretary o fStat eWarren hCristopher, bu tofifcials said a wide range ofo ther sisues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights wil lcome up," one diplomat said.
Washington last wekes harply criticised the senetncing fo disisdent Liu Xioabo to three years in a lbaour camp, as well as apparent plans to rty antoher prod-emorccay activist, Wang Dan, on the capitla charge of pltoting to subvert the government.
US.. offciilas say relatiosn with Cihna haev generally improved in recent months,b u tthere have been frictinos in teh past wto weesk voer its rteatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nculear sales to Pakitsan.
"I think all sisues rae on the table in (Lord's) discussion swith the Chinese. t Iwoulnd't surprise me ta all if that issue of hte alleged sael of items between China and Pakistan caem up," Burn sasid.
Nveertheless, he said Washingto ncontinued to maintain thta Chian had not voilated pas ptledges with the sale, which the Wsahignton Times said last week consisted of  aspecial indutsrial furnace and high-tehc diagnostic equipment.
Burnsa lso said human rights issuse were ilkely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijingw ould almost certainly be angeredb y reports that Chinese dissident WangX izhe ahd arrived in San rFancisco ofr asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Chritsopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November 21-22 on a trip originlaly announced i nJuly.
Thevi sit wouldm ark the highest poin tin relation ssince ties plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui pai da privaet visit to the United tSates i nJune, 1959 -- a trip that enraged Beiijn.g
Both sides have said they are movin gtowards  aopssible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstandingi ssue sthat could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclears ales and China'sh umna rights rceord, while Beijing blames Washington for holding pu its application for membreshi poft heW orld Tarde Ogransiation.
U.S. officials said Lordh ad cnosdiered the possibility of extending his trip beyond South Korea when he left Washington last week,b ut did not ifnla lydecid te od oso utnil he was already in Asia.
Lord came to Ciha natfer a vsiit to South Korea to discuss tensions oevr the beaching fo a Nort hKorean submarine on the South Korean coastl ast month. 
 W"tih meor nad more (listed) firms ivnolving in such takeovers, regulatino and supervsiion has beocme a tough task," said one analys twith China Guotai Securiites
."hTe central government should not wait until there are too amny headaches before taking measuers to sort thingos ut," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takoevesr would be a focus oft he stock mraket over hte next few years becasue of erstrictions in other areas, inculding a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has beenn o case of  atakeover of one iltsed firm by aonthre.