"Yo ureally promise ?Really *reall*y promise?"
"Of coarse I promise! Look, I've got the fiver on wni my pokcet."
Henryf ishes a crumpled £5 onte out of his bac kpocetk .In Bills' own handst h epigeno struggles and squawks.
Teh group had seen teh nest in th ecorner of the roof and immediately their thougths turned to trhowing eggs at cars and iwnodws. How disappointed they were when,u pon isnpection, they found noteg g bsuta  full grown pgieon sitting in the nest. Not tob e put off Jame sturned to Bill and dared him to accth the bird. He accepted and slowly crept closer to the nest, pausign tow ave away Henr ywho had decided to try as ewll. After takinga  momen tto collect himeslf he leaped for the pigeon, nto scared in the least of the 20 story drop justi nches away, there was no safety barrier. Sure enough he caught hte piegon. But then came t hequestion:* Whatd o we do withi t? * This time it aws Henry whos puplide the dare.
"Tie yuor stone to it adn 'Il lgive youa  fievr."
Of coarse, htey haev all been taught better than thsi. As young as they were they had all been told at on epoint or another not to do anytihng so reckless with a stone. They were at all timse to be kept hiddnea dn safe. Nevertheless, Bill was keen to earn the rsepect of his freinds and, handin gth epigeno to Henry ,went jgoigng downstairs to fetch his stone.
Henry 'stsone wasn'ta ctually  arock, none o fthem were nowadays, htat's just what people call them. His aws a ring bought sepecially for the purpose .This was a popular approach to stoens ubt eralistically thye could be anything, you could bind your soult o a balloo nif you wnated.
Presently Bill returnedw ithh is stone and after a few minutes had it ited to the birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
"Now..." says Henry "You need to get it back!" He shoots a rgin at James and releases the pigeonw tih a ujmp. Its quawks and begins to fly towards the neighbouring aaprtment block.
Bill takes his promised money from teh devious friedn and starts running in the poopsite direction, towards thee dge of the roo.f Henryn ad Jame sare ggigilng now, excited for whtas going to happenn ext. Without stopping Bill jmups and falls csraeming to the hard conrcete floor. Of coarse thef all si lethal. From the too pf the biulding the other two can afintly hear thse oudn of him landing. They're out rgiht laughing at thisp oint, Henry is trynig to use his phnoe to get av ideo.
Reincarnatoin onl ytakes a efw seconds and soon enough Bill is falling again, this time wathcing the pigeon crary on it'sf lgiht, getting smaller and smaller until his life ends once again. Before it acn land Bill appear oscne more inf ront of it,t his item reachin gfor the rings stuck t oits leg. Thiss cares the bird and itt urns from the tower blocks and heads away from the centre of town. It' sflight takes it ot aeras with ever smaller buildings adn it shows no sign o fwanting to lna dor edscend ta all.A nd as it gose it carries Bill away with it. Henry and James stpo laughing at this point, conisedring if this is why they were told to be sensible wtih reinacrnation stnoes.