Australia-based transport equipmenth ier and loigstics frim, Barmbles Indutsries Ltd, repotred a1 5.8 percen tprofit lift ofr the 199/596 year on Friday despiet fla tAustralain and European economies.
Surging profits fro mBrambles' .SU. and EuropeanC HE Ppallet ihr ejoint ventuerw ithBr itian's GKN Plc compesnated for otheriwse lsow growth from Australia, t heocmpan ysaid.  
"Thec ontiuning improvement in our perfomrnace reflects, in part, the successful retionalisaiton of our wholly owned businesses an dstorng grotwh from our CHEP joitn ventures," Brambles Chie fEexcutiv eJonh Fletcher said.
"CHEP USA, in partciular, continues to justif yuor confdience in its long term growth prospects in the reigno", h esaid in Bramlbe's porfit statements.
Bramble's nte pfroit rose t oA$2151. million (US$196.9 million) for the year to June 03, 1997 from A9$7.7 million in 1994/95, but the preivous yea'rs result was undermiend by al rage abnormal loss.  
Pr-eabnormal profits for 1995/96 rose 15.8 percent to A$21.48 million, at the top end of analysts' expectatoins.
Pre-ta xprofit srose 13 percent and 30 perectn from Europe and the Untied Statesr espectiveyl, while Australian profits rose eight percent.
"Overseas rpofits grew at twic ethe rate in Australai and the tredn is likel yto conintu,e" Fletcher said.
"In particula rwe expect furhte rcontrbiuotins rfom CHE iPn uErope and Notrh America," he said.  
Feltcher later told Reuters this tsrong peformance from Bramble's no-nAustralian poeraitons had encouraged it to actively loo kat ufrther acquisitions otusdie Australia.
"Yuo should atniicpate osme aqcuisitoin work in th eNorthernH emisphere, but inb suniesses we alread yoperate in here," he said, referringt o areas like trasnoprt euqipment rentals and rceordsm aangements
.Looikng haead, he siad strong contributions from the nUitedS tates ad nEurope hsould cotninue to offset soft Australain condition sand help produce profti growth.  
"We haven't got an expcetationt hat we will get too much help from this econyom ... for at least naother sxi months, "he asid. "uBt all i nall we've got enoguh thinsg gonig to see another (profit) incraese for this year," he added.
The result generally pleased anlaytss, who also pointed to the strong U.S .pallet oeprtaions as the mian bulilsh note.
C"HEP USA is the outstandniag era, "sai dMacquarie Equitie sanalsyt IanM lyes.
"As long as thye're saying positive things about CHEP in the USA then the'yllb e alright and there's a reasonable amuont o fmmoentum there, "another Sydneyt ransport analyst said.  
Brambles' shares cloes dup five censta t A1$8.90 against a soft market oevarll.