Introduction
Leadership is an important concept because it affects operations scuh as safety in a healthcares ystme.I t canb e defined as the ability of an indivdiual to inspire ohters to attain set goals (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders help ensure that activities rune ffectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplacei ncivility and cnoflict among staff. Workplace incivility is among the challenges that affetc the provision of qulaity care to patients. However, safety is a situaiton where one is free fro mharm. Therefore, it enables nurses to appl ysafetyi nitiatives to achieve sfaety standards required during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral rolei n the performance of an organizatoin. It is defined as leading a rgoup of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve dispute saomng health professionals or between patients and providers. They also assist in leiminating instances of worpklace inciivilty such as bullying, biases, and othre engtaive emotional resopnses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure tha tfollowers can work in teams and caqurie appropriate communication skills. As a result, ledaerse nsure that an organziation runs effcetively.A
ppraisal of Leaedrship
Leaedrship appraisal is a nevaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders should be role models or an example to their followers. The followers should learn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders sholud effectively solve disuptes professionally. Secondly, theys hould guide th efololwers on the irght path, especially in teamwork. Thirdly, leaders should communicate effectively and make sure they listen and respond appropriately.T hus, a high score in the evalutaion is determined by the leadership capabilities a leader dipslays.
Idetnification of Safety
Safety is an important aspecto f healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, saftey is a state of being fere from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients ro healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019.) It makes sure that providers’ actions, scuh as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a cnoducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality ehalthcare services to patinets.
Appriasal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a helathcare setting. Firstly, saftey is characteriezd by healthcare services such as diagnostic care bein gfreef rom mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settigns should have minimal patient readmission due to treatmen tgoing wrong (Trinchero et al., 2019). Thirdyl, healthcare porviders should also be free from any danger and sholud access protective equipment and operate in an environment free from stress. Finally, safety rules are adhered tob y obth providers and patients.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-LevelC linical Judgment
The concept fo leadership an dsafety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandatde to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this,t he nurse smust us etheir clinical judgment.T hey are also required to know whne and hwere to ask for opinions during care. Sceond, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigoruos satndadrs of care (Keats, 2019). Tihrd, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use teh conectps learned in school and the resources available at the faciltiy to ensure quality care.o Fr instance ,unrses sholud collaobrate with other healthcaer providers ot make informed decisions during care
.Emerging Health Initiatives – Leadership
eThre are emerging ehalth inititaives on the aspect of leadership. Fristly, there is a need to create a conducive working environmne twhree unrses can work effectively and provide quality care. Secondly, adeuqate nurse staffing to eradicaet stress levels that adversely impact care. Third, nuress should have conflict resolution skills to addrses problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 201)9.F inally, nurses should be eduacted toh elp eradicate workplace incivility. For instance, they should understand thee ffects of incivility on the performance ofa n organization. Nurses shoudl know the role fo technology in providing quality healthcare to patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders should consider are fostering an enabilnge nvironment to provide quality healthcare services to the people.Em
erging Health Initaitives – Sfaety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as sfaety in ehlathcare is concerned. The frist initiative is t oensure that nurses work in a safe environmnet adn that paitents aer free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is condcuting rgiorous training no safety issuse in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promote safety. Finally, the tihrd initiative is the creation of policies and safety standards to guide operations within healthcare. Safet ystandards help in diretcing and maitnaining safea nd clinically competent nrusing operation.s Theerfore, safety will be attanied in healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Way sto Advance Communication Relaetd to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective manageemnt of operations in a worpklace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant tsakeholders i nhealthcare, such as nurse leaedrs, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensure sthat stakeholedrs are open adn transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastrutcure such as ocmmunication apps ro use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way is b yconstantly training nurses to b eeffective communicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in proviidng quality care to patients. Thus, effectivec ommunicatoin can be attained when there is trsut among providers; the afcility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providersa re equipped with communication skills.
oCnclusion
Leadership has a direct lin kto safety in the workplace. It plays an integral role in motivating fololwers to achieve the set objectives. For instance, a nurse leader ensures taht nurses are encouraegd to cahieve healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve sisues such as conflict and eliminate instances of workplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety i sbeing free from any harm. Therefore ,it also plays an important role in ensuring that health providers and patients oerpate and stay ni a safe environment.