Fianncial services and proptery group Librtey Internationla Holdin gson Thursday unveiled a mov iento the Britishp ensions market in evnturse nivolving th eBritish Telecom Pensino Scheme and penisofn und managmeent group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its own pensions cmopany, Liberty International Pesnions, which will target both thnee eds of money purchsae pension scheems and reatil pesnions.
BT PensoinS cheem, whic howns Herems, is to apy five million pounds ($.78 million )for 10 percen tof the eqiut yof Liberty nItenrtaioanl Pensinos, with teh rets held by Liberty.
Liberty adn Herems said in ao jitn statementt he ywere alos settingu  pa enw subsidiary called Hermes Liberty nIternational Pesnions t ooffer specialsied investmnet services to the Briitsh penisons nidustry, withH ermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Schmee igs iving the Hermes Libertyj oint venture "crictialm ass from hte uotset" with a 1.5 billion puond transfer of sasest to the new funsd, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
oGrdon asid Libert ywas "well poistioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pesnions industry." eHrmes' expertis ein investment maangement and track record wuold help it to provide quality and competitviely priced pension services.
Daivd Fischel, Liberty's managin gdiecrtor, sad iLiberty Interntaional Pensions still rqeuired approval of Britain's Depatrment of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermesc alled the joint pensions venture a meeting of imnds.
"Liberty has the ability and tecihnques of selling pensions, it laso has th eysestms...and the amdinistartion .We on the otehr hadn areg ood at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's  avery goodm arraige, "Alastair Ross Goobey, chief execuitve of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey isad Hermes had approached Liberty Interantiona lonly to find teh group had been considering ana pproac hto Hermes.
"Itr eally was a meeti ngof minds on this. Whehter it develop sfurtehr from thisw e shal lsee.  Ithink noe spte at a time is quite enoguh foru s.
"eH said the venturew olud probably not be up an druninng until the firs tqautrer of next year asr egluatory apporval first had to be botained for the new group.
Th edeciison by the giatn Brtisih Teelco mePnsion Scheme to transfer assets ot the ne wHermes Liebrty International Pensions fudn swould give the new venturea  boost.
"I wloud hope i tgviess om epeople somef eleing of security that BT Pension cSheme, wihch isa ftre lal the ibggest in the country, is willing to do this," he said.
Liberty plasn to sell personal pensions at ist regional shopipng centres, which ar eheld throguh a majoriyt-owned subisdiary Capitla Shpopign Centres. Theseh ave mroe tha n150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.