Bre- XMnierals Ltd. hsa been silent since ti said last month that it foremd  apartnership with the so nfo the Indonesina rluer Suharto ,a move that ha sworried shareholders and promtpedr egulators to seek moer information.
Despite wa hirlo f ruomurs and persistent questions tha thave sent the Canadain miningc ompany's shares on a roller-coatser ride, Bre-X has maintained ad ogged silence.
The Calgary-based comapny that controls one of the wordls' biggest gold prospectsi n Indonesia has not talked to the press for weeks. Compayn officails will take calls only from a handful o ffaovured analytss, according ot market soure.cs
"I haven' thad any calls retuernd," said golda nalyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Sihelds in Vacnouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-X on Oct. 28 announced its alliance with Suhatro's son, Sigit Harojjudanot, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia
.Since then, instedaf o directlya ddressing questions abotu its business in Indonesia -- many of which are lpaying havoc iwht the stock price - -Bre- Xhsao pte dinstead to leak to the amrket carfeully selceted rpess material.
nO Sunday, for eaxmple, the company faxe dthe media, analysts and sharehodlers a copy fo  astory from the Fra Easetrn Economic Reveiw detailing its links with Sigit.
The article referred toS igti'sp ossible tie swith th eIndonesian ramy, stated that one of Bre-X's Indonesain partners has been boughto ut and asserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to psuh Bre-X intoa  bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts anya fithi n the statemenst.
"I've ceratinly suggesetd a wfe times that htey talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Wincehster, manage rof surveillacne for teh Toronto Stock Exchange. "tI would be advantageoust o the marketplace."R
umuor shave shruode dBre-X since the Inodnesian goervnments ai dlastm onth ti would not issue essential cnotracts for work on the project until BreX- celraed up an ownership dispute wiht some o fits Indonesian partners.
The dispute has upt a cluod overB re-X's search to find a major mining partner ot help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimatnan, bu tthe allinace with Suharto's son was expected to help teh cmopany clear up its problems.
"They're optimistic that they cang et everytihng within  acouple of weeks," siad gold analyst Michael Fwoler ofL evesque Beabuien Geoffrion, who said he spoke withB re-X on Tuesday.
uBt he said Bre-X would not ocmment on the article it distributed. "hTey justs ent i tout for generla itnerest purpose.s"
Still, tstaements in the article and other gossip were takign its toll on share slniked ot Bre-X an dother explortaion companies in Asia have comlpained teh uncertaintyh as hurt their stocks.
Mniorca Resources Inc., a Cnaadian inimng compayn that has an interest in the uBsang deposit througha n alliacne with Bre-X's Indonesian partenr, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.T
alk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Mniorca Persident Roland Horst sadi ina n interview. "They haevn o intention to sell out," he sai.d
Minorc'as chairman is in Indonesia thisw ee kmeeting with Askatindo officials and verifeid the ocmpany's intentions ,Horst said.
Horst said he hda as lew of unnaswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto' sson too. "To be frank, the relationship bteween Minorac and rB-eX is relaitvely cool."