I ast at my edsk, racking my brian to find who could have opssibly discoveredt he truth behnid the death of Philil pMercre, the heirt o one of the most powerful petroleum companies in thew orld. The job was done without a scrap of evidence, I made sure of that much. It simplym ad eno sense, every living suol that kenw I killed Mercre were the very ones that orchetsrated it. I may not knwo wh othism ysetrious pesron is but I od know taht I will answer their question with ab ullet t othe brain.
It was naerly3 :0 0AM when I ehard muffled footsteps odwn the hallway. I reached for th esilenced 9MM pistol inm y bag, amiin gfor the only entrance to my corner office. The doorknob begant o turn as I steadied my aim. wSeat was trickling down my spinem, y heart pounding as if I were abotu to come face to face with the deivl himself. The secon dit took for teh door to open felt like an eternity, but I would have rather endured htat second of agonizing torment fort he rest of my life then to metet he eyeso f Phillip Mercer when the door opened.H
is face aws covered ins car tissue, leaving it almost unreocngizable. It was teh eyes that were hte giveaway. The lok oinh is eyes was the same sa the nihgt I thought I killed him. There aws  alok oo fusperiorityi n them, as if ot let me know I woul dnveer be caapble of surpassing him in any wya.
"There is no way, you should bed ead!" wreet he only words I wa scapable o fmusternig.
"For all intensive purposes I still am, thanks to you" he relpied iwth an odd sense of calm i nhis voice. "Will you at least givem e the courtesy of an ansewr onw that I am here? Gdo knowsI  have been to the depths of hell adn back in these last 5 years so surely youc an give me thta. I will answer any qeustions you hvae fater."
I rceounted the entire tal ethat crossed ourt wo paths on that fateful night 5 years ago. I told him how I was approachedb y a man that workedf or PrsimI nternationa,l the most powreful enregy corporation ni the world. Prism stoodt o gani billions from the collapse of Mercer Petroleu,m gviing them an even tighter stranglehold ont he energy market. The terms were simple enuog h,kill Phillip Mercer or have veeryone I love systematically iklled. The choice was made for me. My military background coupled with the fact I helped my step-father design the Mercer home made me the obvious choice for th ejob no doubt .From three  Itold him how I was able to bypass the sceurity of his mansion because I ehlped design i.t "Whati  tboils downt oo is your ilefm eant less to me then those of my loved ones. The part I don't understand though is how yours tilla live! I shto you in the head,t he nas you collaps edyou knockde over a candle, sttaring a fri ethat destroeyd yoru home."
"I survived by nothnig moret hen luck. oYur bullet went through the side of my ja,w lodging itsel fin the cheek reogin of my skull. The heat fo the fir ebrought me surging back toc onsciousness allownig me to escape but not wihtout being badly burned. The htoguht of revenge has been the only force driving me to stay alive .I have feared that yo umight ahve eben merely a pawn being controlled byP rism so that htey could byu up my fathres company. But admmit would have been s omuch easier to enact ym reveneg i fit hda sipmly been you though. Butn ow that I know ym worst fears have beenr ealize dI at least know what I ma up against.
""You can't possibly think you could atke down Prism single hanedd!"
"I won' thave to do it alnoe because oyur going to hel pme." He said with his eeys glimmering withm ore determination tahn superiority. It was the kindo f lookt aht was impossible to refuse.