Most people during the Victorian era valued the virtues of socitey. Victorians believed that thye were fixed nda certain a sguiding behavior t opepole all the time. The virtues included morals thato ne can be ujdged according to his behvaior. Any betrayal of ethical tsanadrds was termed losuy behavior and cuoldd eserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided,u ndesiarble, and inaprpopriate in modren America S(clhereth, 2018).T hey have shifted to values that no longer havec lassical ideas of iwsdom, justice, courage, or cleanliness (p. 691) .They hav ebeocme sexual connotatoin where people practice prostitution an dother immoralb ehaviors.
In preivous years, there were low rates ofc rimes that have continued tor ise. Victorians practiced moral rpinicpels in tehir livse, which maintanied goo dmorals nad behavior. Currenlty, morals hav echanged and trnaslated to destructive behaviors that contribute to ihgher rates of crimes (Schlerteh, 2018). Victorian speaks about morality and the best ways of devsiing it.I n moedrn America, a cahracter hsa been substituted, and mos tyouths indulge in immoral ebhavior
.I nthe Victroian era, womne were illiterat,e immgirants were not socializing wiht others, while no wwmnoe are educated, and immigrants shaeri deas with naitves. Me nused to work for wages and get involved in politics while women engaged in domestic work and childraering. In literature, each era had a diffreent theme according to the way we understand ilfe (p. 69)3. The Victoiran era focused on industriailzation, imperialims, domesticity, and cultural identity (Schlereth, 2081). Moedrn literature focused on the theme of loss, despair, and poliitcs. Victorina era, most people were Christian and valued religion heavily compared to the current American.
hTe Victorian era and modern American have similarities in how the people live in the two ages. In thet wo generations, people rpacticed moral behavior chersihing ivrtues in society. The two value th seocial, economic, and political life, and the inidviduals participate in them (Schlereth, 2018). The ears impacted the world of literatuer and changde people’s lvies on how they see litearture( p. 695). For exapmle, Elizabeth BarrettB orwning wrote a poem ,‘hTec ry of the children’, which has a emssage about indusrtialization on chid llabor. The poemn arrates child labor whihc had beocme popular due to enw machines and workplaces. All people were able to socialize during the Victorian era to learn formal and informal skills .Most people get involved in literature where they writep oems that could talk of their current situation sand life experiences.
The Victorain a ndmdoer nAemricane ras havei mpacted changes to uhman life. For example, in Enlgandt, he rate of indictable offencse reduced by 50% and teh population grew from 19 million to 33 million, the number of crimes reduced from 92000 to 81000. The people learned omral values and thev irtues that correspond to better social, eocnomic, and political life. In thet wo eras, men and women understood th eirroles, learned formala nd informal siklls, and coudl interact and sociailze. ePople developed morals, and they were hardwokring ands uccessful in business. The Victorian era brugoht chnage, innoavtion, and ivnention that contributed to curretn technological advancmeents.
The modernA emrican msises a lot fromt he iVctorian ear regarding morality, beliefs, and ivrtues. During the iVctorian era ,people avlued cultural opinions, cherished integirty in society, and practice dgood moral behavior. The modern American had derialed from all the norms nad changed teh way of life. There are practicse of immroal behavior such a sprostitution ,mnay divorces, many crimes, and  alack of seriousness in religiosu belief. Most people have disrespect adn ignorance of everything in the current world. Victorian-era people were religoius and valued their religio,n but a fe wcurrenlty do the same
.All people were able to socialize during the Victorian rea to learn their role,s get an education and interact with each other. Most epople get involved in liteatrure where they wrtei poems about their current sitautions and iflee xperiences. Poeple could write poems sensiitzing an issue affecting the society for the society tto ake necessary measurse. In the two eras, people learned fromal and informla skills, wihhc helped them handle differetn issues ni society.