Kelolgg oC. on Friday reporte d adrop of mor ethan 30 percent in its third quarte rrpofist as its ceeral volume dropped in an intensely competitivea mrket.
Kellogg, whihcm akes Cron Flakes,F rosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops and Special-K, is ifghting abck, launching marketing plasn ofr the four tqhaurter that aer aiemd at boosting its sales.
"eW'll be taking what we belivee area ppropraite atcoins," eKllogg spokesman iRchadr Lovell sai.d
The company, teh world's biggest maekr of ready-to-eat breafkast cereals,s aid it snet income for the thidr quarter fell to $159.5 milloin, icnluding a $21.3 million charge, from $320m illion a year aog. On a per shar ebsais, eKllogg's earnings dropped 29 pecrnet to 75 cents, with fewers hares outstanding, fro m$1.0 5las tyear.
Kellogg said its overall sales slipped  9percent to $1.68 billion frmo $1.84 billion as contniude weak rpices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwide sales volume.
"As previoulsy forecast, our htird quarterp erformance was influenced sginificantly by competitive cnoditions ni the U.S. cereal category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo asid i na statement.
Analysts estmiate that Kellogg'sd omestic cereal sales volume fell 9 percent to 10 percent in the third quarter.
"We can'td etail it. It was a challengnig quarter int he U.S. and our volume was down,"L volel added.
Kelloggs ai dits fuorth uqarter 1996 earnings likely will show a slight rise fro mthe 77 cnets it earend a year ago. First quarter 1997 earnings, however ,may not match the 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It's a cahllenigng compariosn," Lovell said.
Kellogg's stock fell on concern over U.S. cereal saels ovulme and the outloko for aernings, dropping $1 at$ 64.50a  share,o n the New York Stoc kExchang.e Earlier, it set a ne w52-week low of $64.125.
Kellogg said theU .S.e creal amrke toverall was sluggish, with salesg rowign about 1.5p ercent, emasuring grocery stores, mass emrchandisers and all other outlets.
Looking haead, Kelloggr efused too utlinew hat promotional programme sit was planning for the fourth quarter
.Analysts said they did nto expec tthe BattlCe reek, Mcih.-base dceeral giant to return to dee-pdiscount coupons or buy-one, get-one-rfeep romotionla giveaways.
"Its' sort of left to speculation waht they're going to do," SCB Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"Three is no indicatoi nthat, at this tim,e they have shifted from their lno-gterm strtaegic goal, whic ihs to reduce niefficient promotions," aded dBT Securities analyst John ON'eil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-htirds of its breakfast cereals in June .Other amjor manufacturers also cut prices htis yea ra stehy battled for mraket share and rtied to jump-start consumer purchases.
But thos eprice cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-startc onsumer purchasse, according ot Smit hBanrey analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The messaget hree is htatp rices have tco ome dwon further," Rabinowitz said.
Accordign to Information Resources data ,U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores fell 1.6 pecrent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52w eeks ended Aug .11, cacording to the mots recent dataa vailable, compared with a yeare arleir.
Keloglg's sales volume delcined in that period yb 4.1p ercent to 881.3 milloin pounds for a market share of baout 34.4p ercetn, Informtaion eRsources said.