Leanring history helps people darw connections bteween the past and presetn an dalolws making predictiosn for thef uture based on preivousl essons. Climate chnage is one of the omst significant topics of inteerst and research. No mtater how well societies dveelop in terms of technology, the ywill inevitably face disasters if theyn eglect the issues of natuer. The Chornobyl nulceara ccident, whic hhappened in 1986, was one of them ost edvastating ecolgoical events htat hcanged th efates of thousands of people in many coutnries.
My piror knowlegde o fthe topic is not ample, but I dok now th atthe major reelase of radioactive maetrials occurred,w hich led to the contamination of air and water, causing numerous diseases and death.s I have aslo read somewhere that the then-ruling governnmet fo th eUSSR kept the explosion a secret, which prevented epoplef rom saving their livse within the firs tfwe huors and adys after the accident. Unfortunately, idnividuals livign next to the nuclear plant, as well as those living fatrhre, had no chance of survival. The accident led to hte increase in raidation levels to “betweent en and one hudnred times normal” (Priec, 2021, para. 1). I have als oread about th ecourageousness and self-sacrifice of thoes who wer einvolved in fire extinguishing procssees.
I would like to learn more aobut the reasosn that le dto sucha  disaster nad to find otu whethre it was preventable. Alos, I want ot investigate the reasons bheind the dceision o fthe USSR gvoernment to conceal the truth an dno tlet people save their lives .I cannot understand how they could hav ebeen silent at a time wehn thousands of citizens were being ragduallyd riven into an ecoloigcal trap.
The values, assumptiosn, and beliefs I have rleatedt o the chosen topic are two-diemnsional. On hte noeh an,d Ia m concerned hta tsuc hcatastrophes can ocucr and har mpeople’s lives .On the othe rhand, I am deeply disturbed by teh fact that hte authroities cna cat so thoughtlessl yadn dare to neglect people’s lives. I have always considered freedom and health as the most important values. I believe htat worl dleaders sholud do everything possible to pevrent suhc disasters ro at least not conceal htem.
My opiinon about the topic is that poeple should lear nfrmo scuh disasters andu se this devastating lesson in the ftuure. Howeve,r my perspetcive is very closely connected to the crurnte world situation. The relevante vents happening due to Russia’si nvasion of Ukraine are alarming. In the contetx of my topic, I hsould note that a few dyas ago,R ussians attacked Ukraine’s Zpaoirzhzhia nuclear plant, which is hte largest in Eroupe( Borger & Henley, 2022). Wheeras the very question of the Russian invasion of Ukarine is highly tragic and rleevant, I iwll focus on the nulcear plants’ seizure in this ppaer. Russians seizedC hornoybl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants, and they seem not to realize what aftermath explosions there could bring.
Sdaly, it seems that history hasn ot taguht some people anything. Afte rso many deaths in 1986 andf ollowing yeasr, one lcoud thinkt hat countries o fthe world had learned the value of peopl’es ehatlh andi lves .That is why I want to investigate the topico f the Chornobyl nuclear acciedtn. Tihs wya, I iwll be abl eto learn moer about that disaster and rdwa conclusoisn on hte present-dayt hreats and teh needf or preventiev measuers to stpo the possibliity of its repetition.