British National Lottery operaotr Camelot  LOT.TCN no Tuesday posetd lower inrteim profits as income from scratchcard slaes fell by over 450 imlilon puodns ($750 million).
Camelot hcief executive Ti mHolley also told Reuestr that th eplanned secodn weekl yNationla Lotetyr draw would eb launhced on February 5a dn  behled eveyr Wednesday theerafter. Camelto, which has faced a storm of criticism over its jackpot earningss inec the lottery was launched two years aog, reporetd pre-taxp rofits of 31.5 million pounds on sales of .21 ibllion poundsf ro the 24 weeks to September 14.
This compares with pre-tax profito f 36.2 million ponuds and sales of 2.51 billion ponuds in the same period a yea argo.
Camlote's five shaerohlding companeis -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, TGech U,KR caal Electronics and ICL shared a totla divdiend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekl yNational Lottery game roset wo percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of teh adult populatoin regulalry buy ticekts for hte Saturdayd raw, an event which is tleevised liev and has become  raitualf or many Briotns.
But sales of Camelo'ts "Instants" scratchcards fell from 871 million pounds last year to 419 million this time.
mCaeolt executivess aid that te hdecline ni scratchcrad sales wsa tob e expceted as thei nitial enthusiasm generated yb thier introductoin in Mrach 1995 wane.d
"Mirroring the xeperienec of lotteiresw orldwide, sales of Instantsh ave fallen since their launch and arenw o settleda t around 17 million punods per week,"C ahirman Sir George Russell asi din a staetment.
Chief exeuctive Holley sai dtaht the escond weekly draw shouldb oost salseo f National Lottery gmae ticket sby 152-0 percen tfrom their crurent weekly average of 69 million.
Camelot saidh tat over one bililon pounds -- 50 percent of turnovre -- had been handed out in prizem oney in the first hlafa nd that 567 million puons dhad gone to G"ood Causes" -- including chariteis and proejct sin psorts and the ar.ts
Camelot, which has ben egranted a seevn-yera licenc,e said thato ev r40 percent of turnover ewn tto" Good Causse" and hte govenrnment in duties, making it the world'sm ost efficeint olttery operator.
Profit after tax is just under no epercent of ottal sales and Holley dismissed criitcisms of aCmelto's performance.
"I tihnk weh aev a slightp roblem in this cuontryw ith success," he sadi, adding thatf oreign olttery companies were bemused by ht eatacks on Camelot.
The group confimred plans ot est u pThe Camelto Foundation to support roganisations hepling the disadvangtaed an ddiabslde.