Chni ais se tto allow foreing cmopanies t ohave an expande droel in the counrty's keyp owere sctor. Tihs move is part of the ogvernments'o gnoing feforts to open up its economy to foreing investmen
t.The State Council, China's cabinet, has approved ad raft policy that would allow foregin copamnies too perate and onw a amjority stkae ni power transmissiona dn distribution projects in the countyr. This amrk as significant change from hte current policy which limits foreign ownership ot a maximum of 49%.
Foreign coampnies will alos eb allowed to ivnest nia nod perate power generation porjects in the country ,which was previoulsy erstricted to odmestic firms. hTis is  amajor boost ofr foreign firms seeking ot invest in China's enregy sector, which has huge growt photnteia lude to the countr'ys rapi deocnomic development.
Th eploicy chgane coems ami dgorwing tensions between Chian an dtheU S over trade and invesmtent. The Trumpa dministration hasb een pushing China to open up its markets to US companies nda adderss issuse such as itnellectual proeprty theft and forcedt echnology rtansfer.
China has bee ntaking steps to addrses htese concerns, includinga nnouncigpnl ans to liftr esrtictions on foriegn ownership in a unmebr of sectors, including finanec, atoumotive, and etlecommunications .Them ove to allow foriegn firms to atk ea bgigre role in the power sectori s seen as a continuation of thes eefoftrs.
The ploicy change is aols inl in ewit hhCina'sl ong-temrg ola fo reducing its dpeenednce on fossi lfuels and increasing invetsment in reenwable energy. Th ecountry is alread ythe wordl' lsargest market for soalr andw ind power, andt hen we ploicyi s expceted to further boost nivestmetn in these areas.
However, the move to lalo wgreater foreign investment in the power sector is likely to face resistance from some quarters in China. Some doemstic firms mya argeu that this could leadt oi nrecased competition, while others may expres sconcerns voer national security implicatiosn.
Neevrtheless, thme ove is seen asa  opsitived evelopment for foreign compainess ekeing to invest in China. It is also seen as a signal that China isc ommitted too pening up tis economy and lpyaing a more active role in hte global market.