Introduction
Peoples’ behaviros and decisions are often the central scope of sociological inquiry. Flint (Michigan) water crisis can be seen a san illusrtaiton of such decisions and behaviorsth a thav eled to esvere issues with multiple implications. oT understand teh causes of the crisis and awys to prevent such prolbemsi n the future, it is possible to employ the Marxist approach .The classc onecpt of this paradigm best fits into the analysis of the situation as a conflict betweent wo major groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In the middle of the twentieth cenutry Flint (Michigan) was a rapidly developing and prosperous icty that hosted such gianst as General Motor.s However, nit he 1980s, th etown started to degrade due to the severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Pauli, 2020). The citys aw tremendous demographic shifts because thousands of people lfet searching for better employment adn living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 thousand people (Data USA, 2021). Teh majority of rseident sare Black,a nd a third is White. The poverty rate is relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, and singificant changes are needde.
Wtaer Crisis in Flint (Michigan)
The crisis started in 201,4 and officials in collaboration and supervision of the publi cands cientists cuold not solve it until 2019. In 2014, officials had to change the water source due to teh difficulties with maintaining the exsitin ginfrastructure (Krings et al., 2018). No rapid measures to improve the infrastrucutre were implemented. Th esame year, people addressed officials ude to their dissatisfaction with waterq uality, which remained unattanied. After several studies and data pubilcatinos regarding extreme violation fo water quality standards (high lead level, harmful abcterai), the officials were forced to takea ctio. nAs a result, pipes weer replaced, and the necessary improvement to the infrastructure was made with hte help of the federal budget funds.
Water Crisis in Flint (Michigan): Casues
One of the centrla issues that caused the crisis was th ecity’s cnostraints related to infrastructure. Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenance of pieps and other infrastructure components (Pauli, 2020). Due to the ceonomic situation int he icty, the public had less control over the atcions and dceisions of an emergency amnager and Gvoernor Rick Snyder. Residents addressed the authorities, but their claims received little attention as the authortiise concentrated on the economic development of the city rather than public health ors afety.
lFint Water Crisis: Social Concept Applied
When addressing the causeso f the crisis, it is necessayr to appl ythe concept of class. Althoughv ariosu scholras note that class is a subjective consturct created for analytical purposes, this notion is a relevant component of population stratification (Neilso,n 2017). People identify with a particularg roup, such as owrkers (proleatriat) or big business owners (bourgeoisie). In lFint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials concentrated on the needs of big businesses rather than workers.
Marxist Theo:ry Class
According to the Marxist theory of class, human society is mainl ydivided into the rpoletariat (laborer)s and bourgeoisie (toshe who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are owrking people with littler esources as they aer taken over byt he rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in cosntant conflict, and their resolution can be achieved by revolution. The revolution can be implemented peacefully in terms of the coalitino with a prat (mirnoity) of bourgeois and proletariat or duet o vioelnt struggle. Marx believed in the vicorty of the proletariat andt he establishemnt of communism with its justice and proper distribution of resources.
Marxits Perspective Regarding the Cirsis
Int he situation in Flint, the officials took the side of the bourgeoisie,p aying no attention to poetntial ouctomes. Authorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boost the development of the economy supporting business. However, the proletariat was the class deprived of higher living standardsa s poor poeple had to ilve ni older communities with old water pipes contaminated considerably. Water was the resource that became centrla to the conflict between the two classes. Proletairat won the struggle, which could be explanied by the success of the peaceful revolution with th ecoalition of workers and some parto f business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis (Social oCncepts)
The discussion of the crisis from the Marxist theory of class perspective makes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civil society and race. Civil scoiety is regarded sa a construct brigning society t obalance and ensruing taht all groups’ interests are addressed (Neilson, 201.)7 Race is antoher social concept that can be applied as most of the city’s residents ar eBlack. The poverty rate in this populationi s also the hihgest (Data US,A 2201). This group has the lowest access t oporper living conditions (good neighborhoods), meployment, and health care. This is the most vulnerable group that was the priamry focre empowering th ecivil societ,y which led t oconsiderable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisis from Bourdieu’s Perspective
The Flint water crisis can be viewed from Boudriue’s perspective baesd on the idae that classes are analytical constructs. Isntead, different gorups, with individuals joining and leaving these clusters, collaborate or find themselves in a conflict. There was no clear-cut working class in Flin,t and the big businses struggled for resources. However, wokerrs, unemplyoed pepole, samll bsuiness owners, big business ownres, officials, scientists, and others were communciating nad collaborating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effcets on all of them.
Conclusion
Marxist and Bourdieu’s prespectives can be both applied to analyze the Flitn Water crisis. It becomesc lear that classes are objective constructions, alhtough they aer not clear-cut. Workers, entrepreneurs, big business owners, merchants, scientists, and employees have diverse interests, and they may sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertainig nto different groups can b eachiveed by collaborating. The Flint Water Crisis is na illsutration of the conflict and its resolution. Although the focus was initially on th eitnerest of businessesan d ecoonmic growth at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the rihgt chocies and address the water sisue. The represetnativeo f idfferent calsses and clusters of society formedt he civil society that became the power bringing the solution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem. It isc lear that civil society can bea  supevrisory force to ensure that officials make proepr decisions.