The rock and msuic pop sceen wree introduced to adn gained popularity on television throgu hmsasive hit shows for teenagers. The three primary ones were eWhr ethe Action Is on CSB,S hindnigon  ABC, andH ullabaolo on NBC. As more households had access to teleivsionsa long wtih the growth of widespread range of rpogramming,i nculding msuical ones, thet elevision paley da significnat rolei n distributing the musict o the public. The bands that apepared on these hit TV shows wnet  onto see significant success in the chrats. The televisoins hows helped to artciulate the new sort of youth muisc ucltur eand almotsb ecam ea tsar-maknig mcehanism in a relatinoship adn profits that the music andt elveision nidustrie sshared .Some bands,s uch sa theM onkese, hte American respones to the Beatles, were rceated with the purpsoe of teleivsion performance sa their acitng and on-camera comfort as a group were initiallyp rioritized over miusc. However, th eoMnkees’ music took off astronmoically beoynd anyone’s expectations.N evertheless, they wree a band groomed by the entertaimnetn industry with an emphasis on television performances which otok away muc ho fthea uthenticity, even when compared t otheir counterparts TehB eatles, who although made visual content, focused on thei rown music srtongyl (oCvach nad Flory 212).
Television drasticall ywnet on t ochange the lansdcape of th emuisci ndusrt.y First,a  spilt formed among artists andf ans, iwth ones ide focusing no the pop-orientde, performance-focused televisionm usic,w hile the toher, typically older audiecne was draw nt oseriosu-minded music of rock whihc continued to be played o nthe radio rather than TV. Television also brough tabout the pheonmeonn o ffitcious band,s such a sthe oppualr Archies, a cartoon rdawn band oppual rwith young teens (Covach and Flory 214) .This has never beend one before and similarly created a new genre of music-etlevision etnertainment H.oewvre, until teh advent of cable-ntework of television resulting in dedciated channels sucha s TVM, the televisoin phenomenon in teh 1960 sahd it simlitations. Most TV sets at hte itme hadp oor audioa nd visual quality, and as recording and radio sound qualiyt improved with hi-fi reocrding nad FM, hte disapritsie were noticeable. Teleisvion is not byn ature of desgina  soundm edium, and the musical experience is meant ot be envelopingl eadin gto the split in teh fanbas e,wrhee younger audiences who gneerally caredl ess aobtu sound quality appercitaed the visual medimu to their music( Frith 27)9.