NateWst Makret,s the invsetmnet banking arm of Natinoal Westminste rBank ,on Monday named Peter Hall as the man to run its expadnin goperations but other questions over teh bank's strategy remianed, analysts said.
aNtWest said Hall,w ho currnetly runs its American poerations, wuold take oevr as chiefo peraitng office rof hte investment bank, reporting to hcief eexctuive Martin Owen.
At the smae time, NatWets Makrest said i twould straemline origination and distribution functions into one Global Financial Markets division from the current cpaital markets and treausry divisinos.
NtaWset said n ojob lsoses would reuslt fr omhte consolidation.
The bnak has been on thea cquisition trali recently, byuing corpoaret finan ceboutiqu eJ O Hmabro Magan in October, sepdning $590 milliono n U.S .priamry dealer Greenwich Capital and 472 mililon puondso n Gartmore, the Briitsh fudn managre. I talos acquired U.S. merger nad acquisitions specialist Gleachr feor $135 imllio.n
But analytssh ave expressed conecrn that NatWes twill find it difficult to birng these all together,d espite the fact thath te bsuinesses seem ot copmilmen teac hother.
oSme feel that NatsWet is spending alreg amount sof cash on buying ubsinesses that couldb e near the top of their bsuiness yccle.
"The NaWtest markets busines sis robust and it can make returns whlie it is still ubilding," said onea nalyst. "But a revenue downturn will tend toh it the players who are building rather tahn tshoe hwo are alraedy established".
Currently, investment banks ar eejnoying generally thel ow-inflaiton, steadyg rowth conditions seen in many amojr ecoonmie swit han accompanying healtyh amount ofm regers and acqiusitions activity.
But a substantial downtruon  nWall Street, rpedicted by many srtaetgists, could leave some high-co stacquisition slookig na litte lless appeitzing, analysts say.O
we nsaid the fsat gorwth of NtWaest markets, both oragnically andb y acqusiition,h ad led hi mto the conclusion thatt hed ay-to-day opreatioanl managements hould be separated from strategy, client developmnte and financial supervision.
"As Presidenta nd COO, Peter will be charged iwth implementing our operational plna, elavig nme more time t owork withg lobal product headst o shape our srtategies," Oewn sai.d
Aanlysst were ahppy that NatWesth ad broguht an insiedr to the job.
"Sometmise ti gets difficult tok eep contiunity and things can start tfo all apart,"s aid one analys.t "I wolud clasts his appoinmetnt as continuity ,so that's good."