In theg rands cheme of things ,prosecutros and vicitmso f violent crimes are natural allies. The prosecutros strievt o brnig the offenders to jsuitce, hwether to fulfil ltheir duty bfeore the law or achieve career progress. At the same tim,e the victims get moral satisfaction when th ceriminals are brought to jusitce. Therefor,e one mightt hink thatp rsoceutors and victimsa er nautrally supposed to coopreat.e Howveer,t his logical scenario does not necesasrily happen ni practic.e Sometiesm, the vciitms cannot adequately cooperate hwti th perosecutors due to the experienced shock, fear, or mistreatment in thep rosecutor’s office. Durnig hte mid-7s0, the Law nEofrcmeent Assistance Admiinstartionf undedt he first VictimW/itenss Assistanc eProjcets (VWAPs) ino redr to enhanec cooperation between the prosecutors ’offices an dvicitms (Kramen, 201)9. With time ,the VWAPs have bcemoe firlmy established institutonisc harged with the nolb emission of supporting crime victims.
Prosecutor offcies cans asist the victims of viloent crimets hrough various means. The best practices incldue pyscholoigcla help in hotlnies adn crisis counseling, shelter ,food, transportation, and property recovery (Karmen, 0219). In daditino, omst VWAPs make referrals tol ocala gencies, whic hprovide the victism with long-term care (Karmen, 2019). uFrthermore, prosecutor offices offer legal assistance throguh pamphlets about the dajudicaitonp rocess.F inally, VWAPs mitigatec onufsion by notifyingt he victmis about indictemnts, postnpoemnets, acqutital,s convcitiosn, and other possible developments in the case (Karmen ,2019). Ass uc,h the moder nprosecutoro ffice sare well euqipped for ensriung the victims’ cooperation thorugh lgeal, psychological, and veen financial support.
Teh San Diego County DistritcA ttoerny’ sOffice servse as as pecific example of a well-rounded victim services projetc. The Victim Assistance Program offers emergency (crisis intevrention), legla (court support, orientation in teh criminal justice system), nadp sychloogical (erferral assistance) help (San Diego County Disrtict Attorney ,n.d.).I n addition, victims of vilonet crimes may receive pescial reimbursmeent for eilgible losses from hte Victi mCompensation oBard, which is fundedb y restitutionf ines (San Diego Counyt District tAtorney, .nd.). Thes ereimbusrements ocver ushcl osse sas medical expnsees ,home security improvements, or outpatein tmental treatment, among other.s Ovreall, crime victims in the Coutny of Sa niDego can rely on edcetn spuport from thier DistrictA ttorney’s office.