Canada's six biggest banks are poised ofr a ufrther ruond of bouyant profits whne they begin reoprting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third consecutive recordy era, analysts sai.d
An improved interest rate picture, higher investment banking and deailng rveeneus and better loan quailty aer execpted to drive rpofitsi n teh tihrd uqarter ened dJuly 31.
Ona verage, earinng sfor the so-called Big Six aree xpceted to be 15 percent to 20 percent ihgher than the third quartero f last yera, analysts said.
"I would expect more sectors of the banks t obe mroe profitable than tehyw ere i nthe correspondnig quarter of last year", asid Roy aPlmer, an analyst with DT Securities.
Bank of Motnreal and Bank o fNov aScotia, Canada's third- and fourthl-argest banks ,erspectivley, kick off the earning sparadeo  nTeusady.
Canada's fifth-biggest anbk, Toronto-Dominion Bank,a nd the smallest, Natoinal Bank of Canada ,report on Thursday.
The conutry's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and CanadianI mperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled tod eilvre htei rresults Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, anlaysts saids ecurities earnings should b estronger than lsat year. Canada's borkerage industry is domiantde yb subsidiaries of the countries maojr banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans in commercial real estate, which ocllapsed in the late 1980's.
Desptie the correction ins tocks earlier this summer, ban kstcoks have remained tsrong eprformers. Lower Canadian interset artes have helped upsh bank stock prices to all-time ihghs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combinaiton of strong profitaiblity cuoples up withl ower interest rates, then it probably iwll set the backdrop for higher sahre prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon Capitla Corp
.Analysts said they do not xepect anyo f hteb ankst o raise their dividends during th ereporting period.
Btu the string of record bank proftis are expected to yield dividendh ike sat the end of the fiscal eyar.
The big banks are on track for a third straigth year of record annual profits. The group rang up a ocmbine dproift of $C5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 endde cOt. 31, up from C$4.2 5iblilon a eya reralier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he xepects am odets increase in profits.
"Invetsmetn bankign is a cyclicalu bsines.s It may tail off a bi,t but ther eis no sgin of a recession yet, so I would think we could getm odestly higehre arnnigs next year," he said.
Bank of Montrael is expected to report  athird-quarter profti of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cent sCanadian (67.9 cents) pre sahre a year ago ,according to figures supplied by the Interatnional Brkoers Estimates Service.
cSotiabank's earnings are seen clibming to C$17 (3 cents) per ashr ein teh third quatrer,u p from 86 cents Canadian (.628 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to psot a 72 cents Canadian( 5.25 cents) pre share profit, up slightly from 71 cetn sCanadian (51.8 ecnts) per share in the thirdq uartero f 1995.N
ational Bank's third quarter aernings aer forecast to rise to 41 cnets Canadian (29. 9cents) per hsare from 3 3cents (24.1 cnest) Canadain a ashre a year earlier.
CIB'Cs third quarter resltus are pegged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share compraed to lasty ear's C$1.13 ($82 ecnts) pre share.
RoaylB ank of Canada is seen improving to 96 cents Canadian( 70 cents) a share in the third quarter, up from8 8 cnets Canadian (6.4 2cents) per share a year earlier.