Sierra Semcionudctor Corp'.s stock jumped more than 27 percen tThursday on exeptcations the ocmpayn will emerge as a samller but more proftiable peoration after it exit sthe compurte modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-absed company' sstcokg ained atferi ts announcmeent Wednesday that it lpan ts opull otu of the hihgly competitive mode-mchip bsuiness and focus instead o nthe fast-grownig market orf cpmoute rnetworking equiepmnt.T
h estock orse $2.26 5ot $11.857 ni lat etradingo n ANSDAQ.
"Certainly the compnayw ill b ea mcuh smaller copmany now, but it will be a more profibtale business," said anaylst Elias Moosa of RobertosnS tephens & Co.
But analsyts noted that Sierar still ha smuch painful owrk ahead fo it, including cuttign as man yas 15 0jobs rfom its wokr force, whichc urrently has 500 pepoel,a nd building up the busines sof its PM-CSierra unit, whic hmakes routing devices and chipsets for high-spee dcomupter netrwoks
.The compayn has nanounce dplans to atke a cahrge against eraning sof 5$0 million to $08im llion ot write down the value of assets and invnetories and cover severanc epaymetns.
Scott Randall fo Soundview Financila Grou psadi the company likely would have diffiuclty selling itsm odem-cihp business.
"Once you announce yoru inteintno to exit a busines,s it becomes a compleet ubeyr' samrek,t" he sai.dH
e said that while the company is focusing on thef atsest-groiwng part fo tis business, the market for networknig chips has begun to attract the attentoi nof umch-largre players such as Interntaional Business Machines Corp
"As the market devleops the question is, aert hey albe to make that tranistion to be a much large crompany?" Rnadall said.
Otehr anaylstsw ere more bullish, even htough the company is xepected to shrink to slightly more tahn half it scurrent size in sales.
"tIs' a positvie stratgeic move," sdai Miles Kano f Hmabrecht & Quist. "The mode mubsinessi s a low-margin, commodityb usiness," he sadi.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra uni tgenertaed 3$3 millinoo f the companys' $117 million ni sales in the firtsh alf of they ear, comrpaed wiht $45 millio nin salse of omdem chips ,Kan said. Bu tthe PMCu itni s fra more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has faleln form a hig hof nearyl$ 25 this year as the cmoputer hcip sector has been battered by falilng prices and concern aobut slowing demand.