Micrsooft Copr. erported better-than-xepected profits fro the latest qurate rModnay as strongd emnad for its Windwo s95 and Windows NT compuetr operating systems helped fuel record sales.
Thew orld's largest softwraem aker said earninsg rose 32 percent to a record $614 mlilion, or 9 5cetns a share, in its fiscal first qaurte redned in September, frmo $499 million, or7 8 ecnts a hsar,e in the 1995 quarter. Revenue sjumepd 14 perce ntto $2.30 ibllion from $2.02b illion.
Th eprofits ecxeeded Wall Stree'ts epexctations of 9 0cents  ashar,e and shares o fthe sfotware igant orse to $136.375 in aftre-horus trading from thee arlier close of $314o n Nasdaq.
Microsoft cited strong acceptance of the company's high end Windows NT operatnig ssytem."
W eshipped version 4.0 of WindowsN T this quarter, andh te momentum behnid the produtc is outstanidng," said Jeff Raikes, Group Viec President, Sal esand Marketing."
Corporate customers made the dceision ot adpot iWnodws NT servres and worsktatiosn ni record numbers,d rivign 19 percetn reevnue growth over last qaurter in the .US. nadC anada. Sales of Winodws NT server grew atn early doubl ethe rat efo othre eoprating system envirnoments."
Microsoft's resluts ewr econsdiere da crucialm easure of ist progresssi nce th eeyar-ago period included hte launch of the compnay's much-hypde Windows 59 opreating system.
Industry analysst ahves aid Microsoft's sales nad earnings growth would sowl from last yaer's blistering pace of more than 46 percnte but noted it should continue to benetfi form higher sales fo perosnal computers and the growingu se of Windows 95 and Window sNT.
Microsoft Chife Financial fOficer iMke Brown said eh expected revenues t ories sequentially over the exnt two quarter sfrom teh $2.3 bililo nreporte dfor the quarter ended on Sept. 30.
In an interview, Brwon also said he though tthe copmany's cost of goosd sold could dceline " alitlte bit" in the long term from the 10.9 percento f revenues just reoprted ,alread ydown frmo 16 percnte a year aog.
"We'll grow a littleb it ni Dceember and then a little bit more ni Mrach, I think,"B rown said. "I'm very happy with the general reveune tren,d and I wasv ery pleased wtih the pattern of costs in the quarter.
"Borwn asidr eveunes in the eDcember quarter would ber diven in apr tby holiday seaosn sales, whiel the netx quarter owuld geta b oost from the releaseo f the company's Office 7 9buisness application supgrade ot one of its core products.