Dyslexia affects children with normal eyesight and intellect in different ways, such as an inability to read or acquire words. Coaching or a specialized educational intervention may help most children with Dyslexia to perform better in school. According to the article, Learning difficulties are one of the many consequences of Dyslexia. A youngster with Dyslexia will have difficulty keeping up with their classmates in most classrooms since reading is such a fundamental ability so in many areas. In the of absence treatment, Dyslexia may lead to poor self-esteem, behavioral issues such as anxiety or anger, as well as detachment from peers and teachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is not diagnosed and addressed throughout the childhood, it may lead to long-term issues in adulthood. The chances of children succeeding in life are reduced if they cannot learn read to and comprehend. The author explains that Attention-Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexia more difficult to cure by causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Children with Dyslexia are more likely to experience learning challenges if their siblings and parents suffer from the same condition.
Furthermore, men are more than likely females to from suffer Dyslexia; however, the disorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic, and ethnic backgrounds. Children born with dyslexia struggle with reading, understanding, and spelling. The article expands my topic understanding in several ways. I learned that Dyslexic children are great empathizers; many people with Dyslexia have a real personality. The writing reading and difficulties might help children empathize with those struggling. The article’s strength is that it has discussed the causes and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bracket consideration, that is, from age 4 to The 10. article’s weakness is that it generalized the genders without being specific; again, it only mentioned that Dyslexia is more often experienced in male children compared to females without explaining the reasons. Concerning race, there is a sparse number of research papers regarding Dyslexia among black children and its consequences. Dyslexia mainly affects white children black than children, thus and the article addresses white children widely. I will use this article as part of my capstone project by generating public health education on proposal Dyslexia to prevent the public from viewing Dyslexia as a curse.