Every business mustbe managed carefully, and every detail must receive a fair amount of attention. When it comes to healthcare, such facilities must require evenmore a ttention because theyfocus  on people’s well-being. Performing s uch duties mightbe strenuousand expensive , and mentally de manding.As aChief Nursing Officer,one will be face dwith principles thatincludeintegrity maintenance, c ashflowmanageme nt, andemployeemotivation in the givencircumstances.
To start with, a healthcare business must alway s maintain itsintegrity. Itca n be evident th at any busin ess field shouldbe   focused on communication, whichmakes in tegr ityavita l part ( Fisher, 2008). Inthegiven facility, th e integrity maintenanceprinciple is heavily adhered to. Firstof all, every doctor follows anethical code, meaning that theyknowof doctor-patient confide ntiality. More ove r,doct o rs and  nursesfocus on honest communication with patients. For example, in my situa tion, Itell patients about their actual conditions a ndhonest ly answer their questions.
Anotherim portant business principle is propercash flowman agement.  Health car efacility requiresrenovation s  andin novations, meaning that there  will c onstantly besituations whe n new equipment or  repairs willbe neede d (Mason et al.,  2020 ). In this s ituati on, it is highly necessary to implement the  needed changes to not jeopardize  pa tients’  health andw ell-being. For example, asa CNO, i t was m y obligati onto man age the replaceme nt of power generator s. As a result, generators enabled the personnel to carr y out their dutywi thout problems duri ng a storm and powe r outage.Thelast princi ple isthe management of employees andpr oviding them  with motivation. In  thecase of a healthcare facility, it is essential thatthe employeesare rewarded andtheir hardwork  is appreciated. The employees are offered extradays off an dgift cards in the given facil ity. Th is canmaketheworkers feelheard and supported. Withoutthese steps, the nurses and doctors  will have  burnout and  l ose  the desire   to provide h igh-quality results.
 Thu s, the giv enprinciples  were  chos en dueto the im pact theyca  n bring on  employees and  patients. Th  e mentioned principles arebeing used, providing good results and leading to the s atisfaction ofa ll parties. Theseprinc iplesare important  tom e sinceI believethat healthcare should  be based on these value s. Otherwise, no facilitywill be able to treat theirpatients, and there will be no trusta nd respect between healthc are personnel and patients.