Chronic painis still consi dered to be an extreme issue am  ong at least  8% of theresidents ofprogressive countries. Th e introductionof the study describestheapparent link between pain and demoraliz ation. Chronic pain is always accompanied by negative emotional experiences and blocks a person’s ability toreceivejoyandsa tisfaction from life.The  research investigates the development of depressionand anxiety among patients receivingpharmaceutical opioidsand medical marijuana (MM ) as severe painkillers. It compares the efficacy of prescriptions and examines the possibilityof post-tr eatmentdepression.
There is currently a severe lack of  information aboutthe effects of opiates. They managepain successfully, but the past few decades indica ted the growing concernre garding opiate abuse in forms of  overdose and addiction. A more manageable and safe r alt ernative mightbe medical marijuana. However, the legal status  and novelty of this drugdo notallow finding a large number of studieson its effectiveness. Specifically, it concerns the emotional condition of patientsexperiencing chronic pain. This research paper aims to analyze levels ofdepression and anxiety among p eople receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioidsandMM.
The study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statistical data. Pa rticipants were recruited for six months at two majo r pain relief centers in Israel. The researchers usedTheDepressionModule of the Patient H ealth Questionnaire and the GeneralizedAnxietyDisorder Scale to interview participants, evaluate their answers, and conduct the study. To specificall y evaluate and compa re the probabilitiesof depression or anxiety among the diverse groups, the study use d multiple logi stic regression analysis and chose medical marijuana as the control group.
This typeof study is  the mostrevealing andinclusive,as it contains direct responses from a large number of participants. All tools i n the form of questionnairesand scales have already been used and proved their efficacy for  collectinganalytical data. It helps to systematize and classify distinct kinds o f information for subsequent uncomplicate d servic es.Thus, researcherscan compare the effects of medications onpatients  of diverse agegroups, backgrounds, physical conditions, emotional states, andso  on.
The a nalysis of any human reaction has a highpotential of subjectiveness and bias, especially  regarding people  in severe pain and unstableemotional condition. Perhaps somepatients tend to e xaggeratethei rdepressive state or vice ve rsa, de-emphasize serious difficulties. Because the survey responses were thoroughl y anonymous, the researchers were  unable  to carefully analyze each patient’s reaction and compare it to the actual s tates of cond ition. More ac curate answers could be obtained by professional psychologists  via personal communication and behavioral a nalysis. However, this metho d of research  is way more resour ce-intensive and energ y-consuming.Participants were recruited for six months at two major pain relief centers inIsrael.All patients experienced chronic pain for at least 3 months . The study included 890 part icipants, of which 474 (59%) were treated solely with opioids, 329 (41%) were treated withMM, and 77 (8.6%) acquired bo th (F eingold et al., 2017). The remaining ten participants who didnot receive pharmaceutical opioids and medical marijuana were withdrawn fromthe an alysis in the research. Therefore, itis not possible to comprehensively compare patients taking medications with  those who do not.
The  study conducteda correla tio n type of research with variable measure s. It evaluated the interdependence of variousfactors that affected the physicaland emotionalconditionof  patients e xperiencing chronic pain. For example, the survey showed that the ratio of female patien ts was remarkably higher in the opiates group compared to the MM group. In turn, people on opiates were more likely to report major depressive disord ers .
The questionnaires used different  variable measures to collect information. For example, it includedcomprehensive socio -demog raph ic data: gender, age, country,  type of residence (urban/rural) , yea rs of education, and employmentstatus. Patientswere also asked about  their medical history over t he years and thecurrent presenceof any severe diseases such as  heart fail ure, diabetes, arthritis, and soon. The thir d mea sureof the questionnaire was indicated by information on any twelve-month an d lifetime drugandalcoholconsumption. In  addition,  the record included a pain measur ement s cale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelingsduring the last month.
Among all participants in the stu dy, 42.2% suffered from depression, and 37% experienced excessive anxiety.  The plurality ofdepressive disorde rs among patients in the opiates, medical marijuana,and mixed OPMM groups numbered 5 7.1%, 22 .3%, and 51.4%, respectively. The plurali ty of anxiety contained 48.4 % among OP patients, 2 1.5% among MM patients, and38.7% among OPMM participants. Patients who took strong opiatesweretended to place their pain on a scale of 9 to 10 (Feingold et al., 2017). They were also anguished emotionally and reacted radically negatively toalmost all survey questions. Patients who took only MM or mixed m edications course had a significantly more stable e motional state and coped with pain more manageable.
One of the major limitations is the insuffici ently high response rate, 57% instead of70% (Feingold et al., 2017). It can be fairly explained  by the weak focus of respondents who have overcome severe p  ain sen sations and depressiveepisodes. It is not clear  how tou sethese statistics, as they still m  ay be relevant for theoverall analysis.