Hong Kong'stop policemansaid on Monday he was confident the territory 's police could ha ndle a ny disturbances after the July 1 handover to China without the help of China's People's Liberation Army.P o lice Commissioner Eddie Hui,unveili ng crime figures for 1996,told  reporters  that o ffences had fallen b y 14 percent in the year, reaching  a 15-year low and making Hong Kong one of the world's  safest cities.H ui was confident of  tack ling an ycrimeproblem, including  mass disturbances,  despitean exodusofsenior officer s, mainlyexpatriates, from theRoyal Hong Kong Police Force.
China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong on July1 this year aftera century and a halfof British colonialrule. Many in HongKong have raised fears of abreakdownin law and order, including when thehandove r takes place at midni ght on  June 30.
Officers taking early retirem ent packag es privately v oice anxiety that Hong Kong'spolice will become  tarnished by China-stylecorruption afterthe handover.
Pro-democra cy politicianshave warnedthatChi na could impose repressivelaws and use its PLA garrison tro ops, wh ose colleagues c rushed pro-democracy demonstrationsin Beijing's Tiananmen Square in1989, to keep order  and put down protests .
Asked by Reuters  if the poli ce might call in th e PLAtohelp dealwith disturbances afterthe handover,Hui said: "Ih ope not.I can't foresee any situation which I cannot handle,which would require the assistanceof the  People'sLiberationArmy."
He said the exodus o f officers from the service had not dented the force's ability to d eal with mass disturbances in t his freewhe eling city of6.3million people.
"The senior officers whoare leaving have little to do with crowd control," hesaid, addingthat the force had sent many of ficersabroad for training in recent years andwas preparedto deal with any outbreak  of unrest.
"Theoverall manpo wer situation is very sound,"he said.
Police Deputy Commissioner for Operations, Peter Wong,dismissed su ggestions thatthe police werebeingpushe d by C hina toget tough w it h polit ical demonstra tors, after  a year of confrontations involving pro-democracy groups h ostile to Chi na.
"We're under  no pressure fromanybody in  de aling with demo nstrations," Wong said, adding that theHon g Kong pol ice respectedthe population's rig ht todemon strate peacefully.
The enforcement of Hong Kong laws wo uld remain solelytheprerogativeof the Hong Kong Police, he said.Hui said 155 expatr iates had  asked toretir e in the run-up to the handover,representingjus t five percent of the total of3,000 seniorofficers  on the force.
Asked to givereasons for the police's success in whittlingdown crime,  Huisaid he had sent more police o ut on the beat.
"We havemoved a lot of our officers to the front line, to the streets , to ma ke our presence more visible," he s aid.
He said Beijing's crackdown on crime last year had contrib uted t o a more peaceful Hong Kong, where crime often has main land links.
He sai d cooperationwithChinese police would  be steppedup after the handover when Hong Kong'sInterpol  office, now a sub-grou p of Britain, would becom e  a sub-group of China.
The forc e is todrop the word"royal" fr om itsname and abandon theBritishinsignia on July1.But it  will continue to workin both E ng lish and Chinese and w illretain exclusive resp onsibility to maintain law and order and police the HongKong side of  the border with China, he said.