Home use of the Internet's World Wi deWeb has morethan doubled in the last year, with about 11  percent of U.S. households claimingto haveused the Webin the lastmonth, accord i ng to a study byPC-M eter.The market research companysaid 11 percent of all 98.7mil lionU.S. hou seholds was equivalent toabout 11 mi llion homes an dwas   up from 4.4 perc ent (or4.3 million) a year ago.
Inaddition,  13.9 percent o f households c laimed to have us  eds ome type of Internet access service in the last month.Twenty-five  percent ofthese home Web users now visit shoppingsites, PC-Meter's audienceratingreportsshow.
According to PC-Meter's audience ratin g repor t, of the cybershoppers, men rep resented the highestpercentage of users. In September, for example,62.8 percent of Web surfer s were menand37.2per cent were women.Fourbasictypes of shopping are represented  in the top 1 0 shopping  sites;free software downloads, interactive auctions,clubs that sell to membersand retail operat ions."These cybershopping statistics  suggest that home surfers are incre asingly finding value in el ect ronic commerce opportunitie sofferedon the Web," Pamela Smith, a vicepresident of PC-Met er, said ina statement. "With the holid ay season upon us, the greatest gr owth todate atthesesi tes may welloccur  during  the coming we eks."Shareware.com, asoftware se rvice of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site on theWeb, PC-Mete r said,followed by Columb i a  Hou seCo., which  sells music CDs, computerCD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks;and ZDNet's Software Libraryof shareware.
ColumbiaHouse and ZD Net were tied for  the second most popular consumer shopping site.CUC International Inc., which offer  sdi scountson awiderang e of consumer goods andservices, is thethird mostpopular si te and has the highestpercentage of women amongthe top shop ping sites.
Other topshopping si tes includedAmazon.com, at No. 5,which is a cyber-book storewith more than 1million   titles to choose  f ro m . Surpl usDirect was No.6,  with sales of computer hardware and software.
Comi ng in asthe 10th most popularshopping site wa s Onsale,anauction site for computer hardware,software  and  consumer electronics.Onsale also led the category in minutesof usa geper  month, averaging41.99 minutes perperso n per month.
PC-Meter saidits r esults on home Internet use camefrom an October survey of9,9 28 personal computer-owning andnon-PC-owning homes. The survey   is conductedon a quarterly basis . Its audie nce rating  rep ort   isdonemonthly.
PC-Meter   LP is a subsidiary of the NPDGroupInc., a privately held compan y based in P o rtWashington, N. Y.