Regulators took the first of two ste ps Tuesdayto slash th ecost of overseas phone calls for  co nsum ersand businesses,making iteasier for U.S. and fore ign car riersto negotiate cheaper internationalrates.
The Federal Communications Commission hopes to saveU.S. callers billion s of dollars by backing up the  ne w ruleswitha separate proposal to be unveiled next month to cutthe chargesU.S. carriers pay foreign phone  monopolies to complete calls from theUnitedStates.
Americans spend about16cents a minute foradomestic call.But they must shell out anaverage of 99 cent s a minute tocall overseas -- even though the  cost of the callsare not much different, according to FCC officials.
"At 99 cents a minute,you're not going to get a gl o bal information highway," complained FCC Chairman ReedHundt.Tuesday's rulesare targeted atc ountries whose own phone market s areopen tocompetition from  U.S. c arriers,or are in the process of opening.FCC officials cited Canada, Britain, Chile and Sweden, as well as Europe and Mexico.
Under the plan ann ouncedTuesday, theFCC  will waive rules that limit the a bility of U.S. carriers to negotiate cheaper calling  rates wit h anoverseas phonecompan y whose own market is considered open. The rules werecra fted to prevent market abuse by foreign mo nopolies .
Don Gips, he ad of the FC C'sInternational Bureau, said thenew rules "will allow competitive pressures, ratherthanarchaic rules,"to govern  the tel ecommunications market.
AT &T Cor p. Vice President Gerry Salem me sa id they "can lea d to asignifican t reduction in  the amount that American consumers payfor internationaltelepho ne calls."
Un der the ne  w approach, a company suchas  AT&T --with FCC approval -- could ask competing foreign carriers to bid for the rig ht to hand le AT&T phone traffic from the United States to aforeign market.
Alternatively, a U.S. carrier could offerend-to-end ser vice from the U ni  ted States toa forei gn m arket without using the existing rate system for completingcal ls.
Officials say these "ac countingrates" run fiveto  10 tim es actual co sts, refle cting the powerofstate-run monopo lies unexposedto  home competition. U.S. carriers paid theirover sea s counterparts $5.5  billion more in199 5 than foreign companies paid U.S. carriers to complete calls.
While the accounting rat e s paid by  both carriers areabout equ al, the imba lance reflects the fact that many more overseascalls are made f romthe United States than into this country.
International calls from the United States  account forabout a quarter of all internatio nal calls worldwide.
To reduce thera t es, theFCC proposalscheduled for nex t mon th would set "benchmark" rates for what U.S . carriers could payforeign carriers  to complete calls.These rates, according toFCC officials ,wou ld better reflect actual costs.
The agen cy must still work out thedetails of how  long a cou n try would  have to lower  itsratesand what steps co uld be taken  if it refused to doso.
The FCC actions come as the United States is seek ingto open overseas telecommuni cations markets through talkssponsored  by theWorld  Trade Organisation.
The UnitedStates has big rate  imbalances with China,Jamaica, Mexico, HongKong, Columbia and Argentina, among others. Next month's proposal i s likely to ruffle feathe rs.
"There will be concern from c ountries around the world with th e benchmark item. There's no doubtabout that," said the FCC's Gips.