It was a warm summer day a nd I was out for a stroll.Isaw them  on the other side, walking down the sidewalk, twoby two. I didn't paymuch attentionuntilthey passed under theglow of the gaslamp. Never had I seens uch anpair o f  opposites! For the brief time theywalk ed underit, the  light illumina t ed the pair. The man's limbs andhead werecoveredin scars! What I had mistaken for a beard was a mass of scars!His arms  and legs were so densely overrun that I had  thought ita coat andtrousers! The woman had black hair, long and straight,as if it were manufactured string by string. But her skin is what shocked me, even greater than theman! I t  had themost exq uisite complexion, almost translucent  inthelight, and Isaw nary aflaw on it. I looked to my own marred hands, although compared to that man, itwas  a blessing; as I worried,small cu ts formed on myarm. It began to sting as my sweat se eped into my fresh wounds. Not wanting more scars, I sho ok my negative th oughts and ran to the couple."Sir," I exclaimed, "Excuse my frankness sir, but Imust  inquiry,how is it thatyour wife is so beautiful, yet you are so…."
The man and woman looked at each other, she turn ed away, blushing,andhe laughed raucously."Hide ous?" as ked the man  betweenlaughs.
"N-n-o," I stammered, embarrassed by my rudeness."Don't worry," he said, putt ing hisarm around my shoulder, "I get it all the time."
"My  apologies sir, but how, in thi sworld, did your wife manage to keep from scarring?"
"Well, yousee," he said with a wink, "she's not my  wife, but my daughter."
I was taken  aback. "S till….How?"
"Well, she'snot entirely flawless. Shecan't  tell a joke and her cooking's lousy! Takes afterher mother I guess!"
L aughing, he said, "Take alook at  her finger."
I peered at the daughter, she offered her right han  d and I saw a thin bright streakof red on herindexfinger.
The man pulled me in, "I' m gonna tell you a story."
"Long ago, when Iwas married, I swore never tohave kids. I didn't want any childrento b e born into thisworld, so that wasthat.B ut my wifehad other plans,and somy daughter was born. I fell in love with herand swore t o devo te my life to her. As she grew, though, I began to worry. 'How would Iprotect her from t he world?' So I setout to e very doc tor, physician, and scientist I could find, aski ng for a cure. Of course,  if there was a cur e already, no onewould be like this."
He clea red his throat, took a deep breath, and continued.
"Ononeparticular visit to a do ctor, Ihad mydaughter with me and upon exitingthe building, I met a man dressed all in black.
I immediatel y thought, 'This must be the devil' and turned heel back into the building.'Wait,' the man in black said, 'Ican save your daughter.'
I was skeptical andscoffed, 'Wha t for my soul? '
 He replied, 'Ia m bo red withjust bartering with souls, I am more  in terested init's durab ility.' The d evilcontinued,giggling, 'Yousee, I do have the powerto stop your daughter's scarring, b ut I'm not a very charita ble pers on.'
'What do you want?' I asked.
'I want you to partake in a very simple wager,' he said,'Yourdaughter won't  get sc ars,but *you* will; more specifically, very scar your daughte r gets will be transferred to you. If you can manage this wager, y oukeep yoursoul,if not, well, you know wh at will happen."'
I was dumbstruck t hat hetook  the deal, and thathemanaged tolast thislong."And so,"the man  continued,"I agreed and the devil pricked mine and mydaughters fingerto seal the deal. So she grew up and I too k the blows.  Pube rty was a r ough time. Children can be so cr uel. But that scaron her finge r was the last one she'd e ver get, I hadsur e of tha t."
I was amazedat thisman's love for hisdaughter and his willpower. How much pain did hehave to endure? Every scar on his  body seemed to pulsate as I wondered this. I asked, "Do you ever regret it? Your deal  with the devil?" 
He replied with a smil e,"Not a t a ll."