Austr alian fast ferry and transportgroup HolymanLtd  plans to further expand operations in Europe before  mov inginto the Asian market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have  operations in North America and northern  Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doingthesame thin g in the Mediter ranean," Butcher told Re ute  rs.
Butcher said Holyman waslikely into expand into Asia in thefuture ast he coststructurefor operating fast ferries improved  in some marketsin the region. 
"We could beseeing the cost structure changing in As ia, so we are likely to moveinto s ome markets in north Asia and south ea st Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomesrose in Asia th e amountscharged fo  rferry serviceswould r i se,making it more econo mical for  operators like Holyman to enter the market.Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon saidthe  company was alsolookingat fast ferry services  fromDarwinto Indonesia, buthedidn ot expect a decision to be made for at leasta year.  
"It is one of a num  ber  of projectswe are looking at in the region," he sai d.He  said Holy man  had looked at particular routes within China andIndonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a f ew years we wouldhave s o mething up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklus tre showing inits first year of list ing, butsince January this yeartheshareshave more than doubled to  make the stockone of the strongest sha remarket performe rs over the past year.The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hi t ahighof A$6.00 on November 11and are cu rrently trading  around  A$5.06.   
The Sydney-based groupwas floated on the local bo urse inApril 1994, as  part o f  a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the transport group was selling  assets to trim i ts high debts.
"Thestoc k really took some timeto  get off the ground," Butcher said.
"Ithink th erehas been a lot of hard workdone overthepast yearto educate shareholders in what the company is doing andwhere the companyis goingas there wasa perceptionout there that we were amismash of businesses," Bu tcher said. Holyman'smain activities are i ts fast ferry services inAustralia, across the North S ea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operatesa gas pipelin e, bulkcommod ity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are anumberof different projects and businesses, we foundthere are quite a lot ofc ommon thr ead s going through," Butc her said. "I think these operations all have theirown place and there are opportunties toexpand these  further," hes aid.
Butcher worked with TNT for 2 5 years before taking chargeof Holyman whenit split from TNT.  
Butchersaidthe group had no plans to raisecapital to fundthe expected expansion, as thecompanywas wel l financed.
In October , Holyman bought afast passenger ferryfor A $43 million. Hesaid there was no plans for any immediate purchases ofmore ferries.Butcher said he could not c omment  on its trading performance orearnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a netprofit of A$ 16.09 mill ionin cale ndar 1995. The group posteda net profit of A$15.03million in the six months to June 30, 1996, upfrom A$6.79 million earlier.