Genetics are suchastrange thing, su ch a bizarre coincidence of  DNA andtraits. Takemefor e xa mple. I h ave a very unique genome. Immutable,my doctorcalls it. Apparently that means that even whenbitten by a vampire, att acke d by aw erew olf,or even cursedby magic, I remain human. Stubbornly so,in fa ct. I'm nearly 14 00yearsold, ye t another  strange trait of myimmutable genome. Mycells repl icate perfectly, giving mea the oretical immortality and I don't really getsick. Like I said, genetics  are funny. When I was born,I remember being treated as a freak, someone strange and different. My doctors took a lot o f blood and tissue samples, and I remember  spending a lot of time with needles inm e. Then of course,  came the Upheaval.
It star ted about fifty years  after Iwas born, and itcontinued for nearly three centuries. Mankind slowlywent extinct, our place taken by the supernatural creatures of legends. Noone really knowshow it started, but it begani n Europ e. Vampires and Werewolves emerged andbegankilling and turning  everyone  they cou ld find. Thencame the Fomor, the Seelie and Unseelie, and all the other Gloaming creatures. B y theend, every human had been turned or killed, excep t one. I was kept as a  science experiment by one of the vampire lo rds,a man named Kristoff, whocontinually subjected me to new methods ofturning me. He was actually pretty chill aboutthe whole thing, going  out of his way to make sure that I wasn't harmed by his  exp eriments.Krist off ha d enemie s though,and eventually he waskilled, his householdliberated. Thin king I was one ofhis house,I was cast  out in to the  world, the last human left. F inding a job w as easy, since the majority of the newspecies were nocturnal, jobsthat needed to be done throughout the daywere in high s upp ly. I work as a solar panel t ech,keeping a massivefarm ofpanels working for the Unseelie Court. They could handlethe day, but they preferredthe night, a nd  they hated iro n and steel, meaningit was difficult for themto manage their solar farms. Enter me, theirwerewolf tech. I'm not really a werewolf, butit means I get a three  day paid vacation every month at the full moon, a vacation I use to gofishing.
The Unseelie areactually pretty  great bosses, definitely misrepresented in human literature. They have  a ton of rules, and they apply to workers, meaning I get paidexcellently and I have  a great benefits package. My  doctor, working with patient confidentiality, knows Iam human, and helps memanage. He fi les reportssaying I'm a werewolf and he's beensuper helpful gettin gme meals that are balanced, sneaking me supplements to assis t m ym eat-filled diet. Basically, he's my rock. Fortunately for me, he'sa Elder Fae, and is more immor  tal than I am, so Idon'thave to worry about a newdoctor every h undred years or so.
H e's been fascinated by my genome, just  like Kristoff was, and I do my best to makesure he has lots of samples. I figure  keep ing him  happy is the leas t Ican do.As theworld's oldest andon lyhuman, Ikeep my headdown andwatch as the worldchanges. When the Upheaval fir st happene d, the technology level dro pped sig nificantly,  until  thesupernatural creatures began to understa nd humanity'stechnology.Now, my Fae doct or takes MRIs, uses 3D Holo Matrices to plot my genome, and does scansusing long wave light scans. Not only did the supernatural creatures understandour technology, they also r esumedou rexpansion. Now, nearly 1400 yea rs later, the Earthis a utopia, each race well-represe ntedand well-treated. As a human bornin the the late 1900s, I wake up every day fascinated by how the world has changed. Floating cities, spa ce travel,and even flying cars, hav e now become the norm.
All in all then, this world's not sobad. I make a good living, I havelots offriends, andI  recently startedseeing an Unseelie Fae, a girl named Mashian, who's even older than Iam. I've eve n bee n thinki ng of sharing mysecret with her, so hopefully she's okay dating a human. Anyway, that'slife in 1358 A.U. It's different that I expected when I was a kid, but i t's not bad. Not bad at all.