 De ar Diary, I know its be en awhile  but please forgiv e  me. Earlie r todaywhen walking home from school I hadastrange,  no, thestrangestthi  ngthat has  eve r happ enedto mehappened todayand  I am totally frea king  out. I wa sc rossing Squash Creek on the  north bridge like I do e veryday after class. B ut this timewhen I approachedthe onramp I notic ed a small wooden stool sittingin the path.  it  wasn'tuntil I tried wal king around it did I notice the..thing, I don't know whatto call it  a troll maybe? Yeah, atroll  thatmakes sense.I meta troll today. At first I though itwas some crude creation of some meth tweakers made ofdead cat s  and fish but then this har ry, s calie thing turned to me and gave  me a grin.  I was so takenbackthat I fell on myass rightthere. Ifnot for thatI w ould have beenout  of there instantl y, and the fact that this thing s tarted to speak t o me.." Easy there young-en!" it said  in a disturbingly human voice "Whereb eyou off to in such a  hurry"? Naturally Ianswered it. I spoke backto the "troll", I must  have been in shoc k still. "I was justtrying to cross here, I do  it almost every d ay". It wa s silentfor a m oment af t e rthat  t hen replied "You see son, this is  my bridge now"! "And youcross it on my terms".He stuck some sort of crooked cane inmyface asI star ted to get up to myfeet. "You m ust answer myriddle"  he choked out with a laugh.This was thepoint where I was  convinced I had gone absolute lybonkers. I literally pinc hed myself whic honly aidedinhis laughter. "What time isit when an elephant sits on your fence"? he said in a slow majestic voice. How wasIsupposedto k now that?It was  probably some ancientproverb or great lifelesson Ihad never h eard of ..I tried reasoning w i th the thing but it wouldn't have any. I had to a nswerit..otherwise I wouldhave towalk four miles to t he other crossing. Yeah right.I s at there forab out twenty minute s watching it shoo f lies away until I had   settled on an answer.  it   never told me what would happen if I was wrong in my reply...I open ed my mouth  to speak "W hat tim e is it when an elephantsits onyour fence"? I repea t ed. "Its time to buy a new fence" I said con fidently. Thetrolls fac e showed no e motion until he suddenlyerupted in laughter, heeven fell  off his stupid stool. Was I right I thought to  myself. I then decided thatw hile he mocksmywrong answerI wasn't going to take any of that. I ran. Iranfast and didn'tturn back. Now  I'm recording it  all .Sho uld I tellmyparents? What if it follow ed me? Wasmyanswer right? I'mnot ev en sur e it actually hap pened..