The television and entert ainmentindustries vowed Thu rsday to use only their system forrating TVprogram mesand promisedto reject--by legal means, ifnecessary -- any gove rnment-imposed plan.
Following months of work,a  group of TV andHo llywoodexecutivesare scheduledn ext  weekto unveil plans for a system to rateshows based on their suitability fo r kids of di fferent ages, espec iallythose under 14 years of age.
Itwill be similar to the 28-y ear-old system of letters andnumbers used by the motion-picture industryand whichi ncludes the ra tings G, PG, PG-13 , R and NC-17.
"We will not use any otherTV rating guid elines other than theones we are going to announce next week," said  Jack V alenti, ch iefexecutive of the Motion Picture Associatio n of Americaand headofthe "implementa tion gro up"developing the ratings.
Butparental groups, children's advocates, educators andso me key lawmakers -- including Representative Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat -- have demandedt hatthe  group include a content-based system specifying the level of sex, violence and bad lan guage.
Lawmakershave no truled out a leg islative fix.
"It is clear that the industry has so fa r failed to  respond ad equately to the fundamental interest of parentsin knowing the specific conte nt of TV shows in   advance," Markey said at a news conference accompaniedby other lawmaker sandgroups pushing for acontent-based syst em likethe one now used by theHB O cable channel. 
At a press conference respon ding to Markey,Valenti lashedback. He accused Markey oftrying to use government as   a "big brother"to impose hi s own scheme. AndValent ivowed not to bend  under pressure and alter his group'ssys tem.
"We're notgoing to change a wordof it. We're not going to redot an 'i' or recr oss a't,'" Valenti said. "If there  is any interven tion by government, we'regoing to be incourt in a nanosecond."
The Federal Commu nicationsCommissi onalsomu st  approve or reject theratings system. If it were to reject it,theagency could call for development of an alternative plan -- one that Valenti said the industry  would ignore.
On ce the ratings are implemented inJanuary,Valenti did say the industrywould revi sit the system afterabout a year to determine whetheritshould becha nged or "tweaked.""Is it perfect? Of course not. All subjective systems are flawed. So is ours," Valenti said.The ratings --expected toinclude six broadcategories --will not applyto news, news magazine shows such as "6 0Minutes"or sports. TV networks and syndicators willi ssue the ratings, with the categories "mingling" age andcontent, accordingto Valenti.
Proposed  guidelines leaked to the media includetwo for chil  dren: "TV-K" for kids and suitable for all ages; and "TV-K7" for children older thanseven.
The other four are:"TV-G" for general audiences; "TV-PG,"parental guidance sugg ested;  "TV-14" for p arents strongly cautioned;and "TV-M" for mature audiences only.The rating are to be used in con junction  with a "V -chip" installed in TV setsthat allow parentstoblockout showsthey consider too violentor ra cy.The HBO  s ystem, developed in  the mid-80s, offers ratings suchas "MV"for "m ild violence," "SC" for "strong sexual content" and"AL" for "adultlanguage." 
But Valen tisaid th at system is unworkable and istoo complicated to appear in TV listings in  the newspaper.He  also saida 19-member monitoringand oversight group will becreated to oversee thenew ratings. It will include a chairman and representives fromthe creative sideof the industry, TV broadcasters an d the cable-TVindustry.