Dyslexia affects childrenwith no rmaleyesight andin tellectin differ ent ways,such as aninability to read or  acquirewo rds. Coachingor aspecialized educationalinte rvention may help most children with Dyslexia toperform betterinschool.According to the article, Learning difficultiesar eone of the many consequences  of Dyslexia.A young ster wi thDysl exia  will have  difficult y keeping up with their classmate sin most clas srooms sinceread ing is su ch afundamental ability in so manyareas. Inthe absence of  treatment, Dyslexia maylead topoorself-esteem,behavioral is sues su ch as anx ietyor anger,as well a s detachm ent from  peersandteachers, and parents. When Dyslexia is  not diag nosed an d address ed throughout the childhood, it may lead to lo ng-term issuesin adulthood.Th e chances ofchildren succeeding inlifearereduced if they ca nnotlearn  to read and comprehend. The auth or  exp lainsthatAttention-Deficit/ Hyperactiv ity Disorder (ADHD) may make Dyslexi a moredifficult tocureby causing difficulties in maintaining focus, hypera ctiv ity, and  i mpulsivity. Children withDyslexia  are more likely to exp eriencelearning challenge s if their sibling sand parentssuf fer from the same cond ition.
Furthermore,men aremore  likely than females to suffer from Dyslexia;however, thed isorder affects people of all ages, socioeconomic,and ethnic backgrounds. Childre n bornwithdyslexia struggle with readin g,understanding, and spelling. The article ex pandsmy topic  unde rstanding in several ways. I learned th at  Dyslexic children are great empathizer s;many people with Dyslexia have a real personalit y.The wr i ting and reading difficulties mighthelp childrenempathize withthosestru ggling. The ar ticle’s strength is that it has discussedthe causes and effects of Dyslexia with the right age bra cket consideration,that is,from age4 to 10.The article’s weakness is that it  generalized the genders without b eing specific; again, it only mentionedthat Dyslexia is mo re often experienced in male children comparedto femal es with out explaining  thereasons. Concerning race,thereis a sparse  number  ofresear  ch  papersregardingDyslexia among blackchildren and its con seque n ce s. Dyslexia mainlyaffectswhitechildren than black children, and thus the  arti cle addresse s white children widely . I will use this article aspartofmy ca  pstoneproject by generating public  health education proposal o n Dysle xia to prevent the public  from  viewing Dyslexia as a curse.