I lostmy motherin the stampede.She was torn from my grasp and carried aw ay in the flow of sweaty, mindless human ity. My nine y earold mind coul d not process this and when I screamed my voice was drow ned outby the mashi ng of feetand the grinding of flesh.
For a few momentsI was lift ed off  my feet between t hree fat ladies and dragged around in kind ofa sadistic  tango, like tho se people ondancing with the stars.
I wascarri ed to the toy isle  andspun arou nd in athree sixty then dropped to the floor. A large boot crunchedover  myhand. There was a sickeningcrackle as I saw mywristbend i n away It never  had before.
Ipulled myarm to myself and look ed in h orror at m y limp wrist and dangly fingers. For afew more moments,  there w as no p ain. Until I gotkicke d in  the shins,by askinny teenager with brown baggy pants. Helookeddown withhis glazed eyes that narrowed for asecon d as he stumbled aroundme. He mumbled  something under his  breath and then was gone inthe sea of shoppers. Nowmy wrist and my ribs hurt, pain flared t hrough my body a nd I screamed, it was all I could do.The consu mer s rushed rig ht onby. I tried to stand up bypushing upfrom the  floor. My wrist bentb ackwards and my whole arm was slashedwith pain. I used my legs  and popped up,just intime to  get  bounced by a la rge belly with a shirt thatsaid santa I've been good.Santa's face knockedme backwa rda few steps, butluckily Icaught my balance at the last moment onan elderly man whowas holding u p better than Iwas, andI tried to fight the crowd towards the ex it.
Being pu shed and pro  dded and severely injured, andtoo shortto see over thefoamingmasses, I somehow ended up deeper in  th e stor e.Lost in the underwear isle. Shelves we re be ing rippedclean. A hugerufus erupted a few ya rds away, and a display  with racks of pants and shoes was tipped over. Through the chaos I he ard screams of agony and saw flash es of several peoplepinned underthe large shelving units.
I couldn 't fight i t, I  had no control ofwhere I went, and thecrowd carried m e closer to  theaccident. Therewas blood on the floor and a twitching black man's arm swatted m y leg from under a  ma ssive beam-like shelf.Thankfully, I  was whisked away from thescene, and actually spotted  a small break in the crowd, I ran throughtheopenin g, headed toward the big red exit sign that is only about thirtyyards away, bu t suddenly my progress was halted by the closing in ofhuma n  bodies.I'm stuck. A T.V.being carried smashed into my wrist and I was  suddenly in tears fromthe pain, confusion andh ysteria.
Suddenly a shotgun blast echoedacross t hestore. Then anothe r.  The c rowd was quieter  fora moment, and the swarming buzzing slowed down andeveryt hing seemed almoststill. For abouthalf a second.Then  th e screaming started. I was pushed to  theground and a woman fell ontop o f me. Peoplewere stepping on both of us runningfor the exit, running for the back, running into each  o ther in cha os. My wrist screamedin pain,myribs were probably broken,and Iwas  pinned under  this woman whowas now unconscious. 
The last thing I saw  wa sa boot coming down on my face.