The librarian looked up and smiled  when he entered. Its Saturdayand he's in the library again.
Lee walked in and looked around at his world. A beautiful world that people with a pass ion had built. And he was all alone again. Ofcourse there's that weird guy that comes in to re ad the newspaper, he'd seen him over the weeks and thought the paper is less than abuck to have delivered,why drive here cheapskate. Anyw ay, what was on the menu today.
Roaming up and downthe isle slooking at the funny numbering system 101. 001 -500 tothe  left, 101.501-1000 o n the right. Itsnice to be ableto understand what you're looking for. He liked this library, it still had an old fashioned card catologue.
Science. It makes sense. 'What subject though'. Flipping cards over  and over 'Newton?' Can I understand this? Sureif they could figure this stuff out 300 years ago,i should be able to understand it now. A scrap of paper with some obscure  numbers on it and off he goes.
'I've got all day.' An hour later the kid looks up and says "this is some dry stuff". Puts it back,  while walking back, he sees Darwin. Stop.'I've he ard that name before, is this they guy they're always talking about in church?' He takesasingle book back to the table, sits down next to the vac ant computer terminal and sitsdown to start thumbing thru it. Read the book a b it, do a couple searches on the computer. It seems that answers lead to more questi ons.
'Jeez.. is there an end to this. Is there ever going to be a final answer?'
"No" says the voice behind him.
Lee  looks up and sees the newspaper guy sitting across fro m him. "Uhm. Sorry, man, i guess i wasthinking out-loud'.
Its cool. As  usual there's only you and i and staff here i really don't worry muc h about disturbing anyone anymore. That's some heavy stuffyou're reading.Darwin? Origin of the species. Interesting, butdry. What else  you been nosing around in?
I  was trying to read some Newton earlier, but that was even dryer than this. Do you know anything about this stuf f? I keep hearing these names mentioned when i go to chur chand they really seem to hate these guys. Saturday is my day when when i don't have to be at school, no church, no youthgroup.I told my parents i was going  to friends, (looks around) i guess i really didn't lie.
You got any opinions on this stuff?
You're aweird kid.
Yeah, i know. I'm Lee. I like to read. I was reading a website I'm not supposed to read and it kinda started me looking for more information. And now i take Saturdaysoff from my family and just kinda go exploring.
...John, he holds out his hand. Those are some heavy books you're reading. I started reading what was written  and thought, someone else actually sees it too.
Huh? What do you mean 'see's i t?'
I 'read' those books so very long ago. (As Lee looks at him very oddly, thinking, this guy isn't that old.) All thoseguys, they came to mean something to me. But as each one spoke, it killed a small piece of me as i understood the words they spoke more and more. You see, my whole life, I've lived in boo ks. I love books, and they love me. I see the things in the world  and then I always find a bookin it. No wdays, nobody reads the books anymore. They all watch TV and surf the internet. They, pe ople (looking at a wall) just don't care. Learning anything takes time.
Sorry Lee, right?... You asked a question. What wa s it, doihave anopinion on anything. Lots of opinions, but very few answers. What do you want to know.
Everything. Lee smiled in response. Johnjust chuckles. Big goals man.
"Letstry to narrow it down" John says. Yeah, gotta start somewhere.You've got Darwins book there. What do youthink  aboutwhat little you've read?
I've heardthe mention ofDarwin in school. The teachers try to tell us we came from monkeys or something like th at. I know my church isalways talking smack about him. So i decided to read for myself. He sees Joh n wincealittle bit. Hey, you ok man. Yeah, John says. I get these chest pains attimes. I'm not  doing to good nowadays. Anyway, if you w ant to know the truth, I'll tell you the truth. The messed uppart is nobody will  listen toyou whenyou  r etel l it.
John starts talking, Leeasking questions in amazement of the  stories he's hearing.
They talk for hours, one speaking of life and on e asking questions.
Whatwas that guys name youmentioned, Occam, ilike that thought...the simplest path is usually the correct path. Keep it simple, no need to complicate things. Yeah i agree, i tend to go with that path althoughmy teachers keep wantinglong ass answers to things.
Joh n, what do you do for a living. Do you have a job. I don't mean to berude, but i wonder you look younge rthan my parents but you know a lot morethanthem. Are you rich?
Well, i used to own my company.Therewas a hostile takeover,  and they literally  tried to kill me to make sure I wouldn't get into their business. I was good at what i did, but theseother guys didn't' like me in their territory.
Wow, they tried to kill  you over your business?Yep. Hired some  guys to  draw me out, got m e coming out of dinner one night beat my ass stabbed me a time or two and then left me  out to die.
OMG. (blurts out Lee) oo ps so rry, picked  that up my littlesister.
Whatwere you doing. Fightin g the mob? I've seen thosemovies,is tha t stuffrea l?
Well Lee, I guess you could say that. My business was secrets. I warehoused secretsand others didn't want me getting in their secrets. It was kinda like the dot com stuff you read about in your history books, have you gotten to that stuff yet?
Y ep, during the 90' s, the dot com boom. People were inventing ideas, not making any products and selling information to one anotherthat really had no value. Lot ofpeople got taken in. Looked like a good time for awhile.Yep, said John. That's the idea. But yo u see, I wasn'tdoing anythin g with the information. I kinda juststored the infor mation and allowed others to get on with what th e y were doing. And  in return they would pay me a weekly to monthly small fee to know their secrets were safe with me.The business was great, I wasoperatingin 15 ish countries and then other companies got wind of what i was doing, how great the cash was and they started rewriting the rules. My company kinda fell apart.And now i just kinda hang out in places that nobody goes waiting forwhat i know is going to happen. It happens to us all.
John closes his eyes. You can see the painin his fa ce.
So, wow. I  don't know where to go now.Got anymore reading suggestions for me.
Johnlaughs, you really e njoy the learning don't you. Its addictive. I'm goingto tell you this Lee. There are so many guys t hat offer you new visions of what the world you'r egoing to inheri t is. Sagan, Tys on, Dawkins...wow...so many books and so little time to understa nd all the words.
(I see hi s eye twich like he's really in pain now)
I'll tell you this, by the time y ou read those books and more like them. You'll understand so much more about your world.You wont need to seek out people for an an sw er, you'll  become the answer. A friend and teacher of minetold me o ne time, There are 3 things that do not remain hidden forlong. The Sun, The moon and The Truth. (a wince) Remember, Knowledge is power. Yeah, i know kinda corny. But true.
Hey John, i gotta getgoing. Ineed to pick up my suit on the  way home for church tomorrow. I know the pastor always get happy whenpeople b ring new folks to church.You want to come with us? My pare nts have their own pew you can sit up on the front row with us.
Wow, its been a long time since i was invited to a church.But I'm g oing to pass, they really don't sit too well with me anymore. We kinda have a different vi ew on things nowadays.
I tell you what Lee, youseem like a good hearted kid.I've got  some traveling to do.I'll see you in a few weeks maybe. You knock out those names i've thrown out and when i get back. If you still feel the need to talk, we'll talk.
Ok.
Cya John. Cya Lee.
6 weeks later, Lee is walking into the library. He dropsthe Dawkins book on the counter and the librarian looks at him kinda disapproving. He notices the shiny gold cross and thewell worn bible on her desk. And just shrugs. Uhm...Miss? Yes young  man. Hey youknow that guy that used to hang out in here reading the papers on the weekend. Have you seen him lately?
The librarian kinda gasps and covers her mouth. We weren't supposed to talk about it, but he was here a couple week s ago and kind a slumped over in  a chair. We called 911 but never heard much about him a fter that. I had forgotten abouthim untilyou mentioned it.