The  articlerepresents an o verviewofother literature on  methodologies andcriteria used in suppli er evaluation  andselectionprocess,which is believed t o be one  of the vitalcomponents of a successful operation of a manufacturingcompany. In particular, thepapere mp hasized t he indus try’s change in thisfield – fromfocusing primarily onoperational efficiency to  embracing the po tential ofstrategicpartnerships.The article claim s that the right approach to supplier assessm ent, thus,  is thek ey to a compa ny’s d evelopment and progress.
Thepaper starts with variousways toaddress  the issuesrelated to MCDMof suppl iers’ sel ection. The mostcommo n ones arestated tobemathematical models,Simple multi-attribute rating technique (SMART), ana lytic networkprocess (ANP),  analytic hierarc hy process (AHP),data  envelopment analysis (DEA), linear programming,  and someothers.For example,DEA  is a methodo logy focusedon a supp lier system and classif ies it either as efficient or inefficient  based o n  s electingparticular criteria. Mathematical programming models  usually incor porat ecomplex evalua tions betweensupplier s, allowin gone to compare them and i dentify themostoptimal interms of costand other criteria.
Thearticle furthercompar es all  methodologies by their popularit y expressedinthe  frequencyof mentions in the lite rature. Thus, DEAis the most commonapproach with 30%  mentions,where as mathematical progra mming  (17% ),AHP(15%),andcase-based reas oni ng account for fewer mentions. How ever, those meth odologies re present thelargest share of all MCDM a pproaches.Thearticle highlightst he significanceof knowing thisdistributio n, which canbuild an id ea ofthe most prominent wa ysto add ress theissues w ith suppliers’ assessment and selection.  It is also stat ed t hat s uppliersshould beevaluated basedon “the inputsof the strategic, f unctional and operational levels”(Agarwal et  al.,  2011). Me thodologies such as DEA,mathematical programm ing,  or AHP are  advised to  be used for identifying the most  optimalsuppliers, whereas AHP is  not ed to be effectiv ein providing consi stency.