Ominous  gray clouds scudd ed over Hong Kong on Sundayas the British colony marked the 100-day countdownto the handover, but there were fe wphysical signs of gloom and doom in thewealthy community of six million.
More than 7,000 Hong Kong people too k to the streets to the din ofcymbolsand kettle drums in a pa triotic fervour tocelebra te the impending reu nion with China at midnight on June 30,19 97.
A stone' sthrow away, thousands mor e, most of them wester ners and swell ed by an influx of visitors,indulged inthe rit ualistic orgythat has built up around theannual international Rugby seven-a-s i de tourna ment.The tournament was honoured this year, the last underBr itishrule, when Rugby Autho rities made it into the world cup event .The 28th and la st Britishgoverno r, Chris Patten,described Hong Kong as running as smoothlyas a Rol ls Royce limousine -- but warned China against tinkering withthe  finely tuned machinery that is the Hong Kong of 1997.
Butfor themajority of Hong Kong'shardworking citize nry,it was a normalSunday.  A chance for a lie-in, a family gathering ata restaurant -- a day of f from work.
With just 100 daystogo,  HongKongis awash in a sea  of differing emotions.
Some,like the street revellers, are delighted thatmorethan 150years of Chinesehu miliation isaboutto end.
"This isa grand and great occasion. In just 100 days, we willreturn to theChinesemotherland," said chief organiser Raymond Wu   as t he revellers gath e red in VictoriaPark -- named afterthequeen who rei gned when Britain, at the height of its imperial powers,wrested Hong Kong  from China'sweakand crumblin g Qing dynasty in the  mid- 19th century.
" We welcome the washing away of o ver a century of humiliati o n and shame,"Wu said to a burst of applause.
Others fret, particularly thepro-democracy camp, about their futureunder a  Chinathat has already put inplace plans todil ute civil liberties anddissolve the elected legislative council -- undoing democr atic reformsspearheaded byPat ten.
A handful of demonstrators, their mouthstaped shut in whatthey said was a  symbol of things to come , took uppositi on around the base ofQueen Victoria's s tatue andhel d upplacards condemn ing China's brutal military crackdown on student-ledde monstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Squarein June 1989.
Many people are simplykeeping their fingerscrossed.
But Hong Kong, as it enters the lastleg of its drawn out transition fr om British colony to Special Administrative Region ( SAR) ofChina , has defi ed those who forecast asociety in chaos, of panic, economiccollapse anddeserted buildings.
Pattensai dHongKong had reached this moment in its his tory in  first class condition.
Hecited a poll conducted earlier this m onth bythe 1997 Transition Project atHong Kong's Baptist Universitythat found that 90percent  ofthe people herewere happy with life.
Patten saidthe views that Hong Kong wouldqui ckly adjust to the rolling back of  freedomsor of more authoritarian government weredubious .
" Ho ng Kong is,  as I said recently, a smoothly functioning community. It's like a Rolls Royce," Patten said.
"All you ne ed todo if yo u're in charge isto slip into the driving s eat,switch  on the ignitionand awayyou  go.
"I don't quit e see the point of lift ing the bonnet to tinker withtheengine. That only raises worries about whether  it will work so well, andwhether you may  be persuaded  by some people to  start stripping itdown for spareparts."