"Who can replace Death? Hewas themost f earedof usall.Without Death there  can  b e noreckon ing  uponthesinful mortals."
War scratched his thi nnin g beard. He was run  nin g o ut of  options. No othe rs had dared to t ake  upsuch a heavyburden. While War was nost ranger tothe horrors of , he shudderedto think  aboutthe atrocities that Deathhad committed.Was thereany being in  th e7realms to take up the Cloak and Scythe?
"Butther e is someone." hissed Famine." Brothers youareaware that allt he atrocit ies we havecommitt edwere dealt by Man. War,death,famine and conquest. T hese  were all  Man's undoing. Who elsebetter todon the burden of Death the n a man hims elf?" Fa mine's raggedhoodcovered his face, only  showin  g his decayin g mouth twisted ina sicksmile.
Conquest wa s quick to challenge.
"Man, donni ngthe  very baneof his existence?Brother, youri mprudence willbethe end of us all. Amortal man is hideouscreature. He isgreedy, selfishand cru el.Giving one this muchpower willonly result in abuse."
"Conquest, you areas foolish as ever. Hav e  you learnt noth ing from Death?Hewas  the  wisest of us all, he-""If Dea th wassowise, explain hi sabrupt departure. Why did heleave his duties behind? We are th ehorsemen of the apocalypse; bothterr ibl e and glorious. Whenthe Hornof the Heave ns sounds wewillcharge and stri ke fear  intothe  hearts of sinners. It is who weare. Death was a fool for leaving."
"ENOUGH!"
War sl ammed int o Conquest, knocking him d ow n tothe brimstone. Heunleashed an onslaught of   blows onto his golden armor  until it was den ted beyond recognition. Brea thless, War stoodup towerin g over his foe a nd boomed.
"Iwill not take this insolence. Death was the best of  us. I loved him as a  b rotherand a mentor."
War's stone facesoftened  for aseco nd.
"Shouldyou  be s tupid enoughto blasphemeourbrothera g ain,I wil l end you."Conquestnoddedin shame. Hewasnot used to th e bitter tasteof defeat.He silently  vowed that War would pay for the humiliati on he suffere d.
" Famine. You say that a mortal can replaceDeath. Bring h imtome."
"As you wish brother."