Macau International Airport –  AirMacau,the flag  carrier airlineofMacau, is expecti ng a substantial  increase in belly cargo as it pl ansto introduce new aircraftand routes to China .Air Macau has announced the acquisition of two  newAirbu  s A321neo aircraft,which will joinitsfleet fromDecember 2021.Thenew aircraft willhelp ex p and theairlin e's n etwo rk, increas efrequencies andimprove connecti vitybetween Macau and China.
With the  add itionof new aircraft and routes, Air Macauis al so expecting asignificant increase inbell y cargo. The airline'sChiefExecutive Officer, Chen Hong, stated, "The intr oductio n ofthe newaircraft and routeswill  open upnew opportunitiesfor cargo growth,  espe ciallywith  the number of b elly cargo capaci ty."
 Belly cargo re fers to the cargo carried  in t he c  argo hol  dof the aircraft,beneath the  p assengers' ca bin.Witht he new aircraft's larger cargohold, AirMacau will be able to increaseitscargo capacity and ta ke advantage of th e growing demand for air cargo transportation  betwe en Chi na and Macau. 
The airline's cargo department has a lready beenin   talks  with logistics c ompanies and shippers to explorenew cargo opportunit ies. "We have identified severalsectors forgrowth, inclu ding mail, freshproduce,and e-c omme rce," saidAir M  acau's  Chief CommercialO fficer, Liu Cheng.The airline has est ablished partnershipswith s everal logistics firms in China to offer seamless cargoservices to its cu s tomers. Air Macau has also said thatit will be using its cargocapacity tosupport the transportation of m edical supplies andequipment.
Air Macau's  plansto   expand its  network and car go opera tions come at a t imewhen theair cargoindustry's deman d h as beenonthe rise. The COVID-19 pandemic h as accelerated the shift towards e-commerce and boosted the  need for faster, more efficient cargo tr ansportation.
I n 2020, Air Macau'scargo operationscontributed significantly t o theai r line's r evenue, making up nearly 20% of itstotal revenue. The  airline is optimisticthat with the expansionof its cargo operations, it willcontinu e to see growth initsfin ancialresults.With the introducti on of new a ircraft androutes,Air Macauis positioni ngit self t o take advantage of  the growi ngdemandforair cargo transportati onin the regi on while providing more cargo transportation option sfor  it s customers.