I knew I could  not cook , butI did not sweatit. The door bell rang, and I wasso excited. I opened thedoor and let m y two gooey one eyed companions in.  They were so  glad that they did not even notice my baseball bat. I swung. They  w ere mineno w. Allmine
The two alienawoketo"gourmet" jellybeans. They stuffed themselves,  those crude idiotic blobs. Smiling they commentedon how stran ge hum an customs were. That was quite funny,consi der ing what I really hadplanned.I  laughed at them.
Three weekslater, they were still strappedto their placesand woke up , ate,  then slept.  Jellybeans were their every  waking  hour. They lived jellybe ans loved jell y beans, breathed jelly beans.On their ninth week they r ealizedwhat Iwas doing, but they were power less.I laughedat them as I broke their jaw hinges. Now they c an't complain , s o all was wondro us again.
By thenext  week they went on a jellybean strike,  butI knew thatwouldnot last long,considering how attached to the food they were.
I broke their j aws, theirlife, their will. They were now truly mi n e .
Twoyears ju st  flew by, my little companions wer e so enterta ining.But the littletrick was starting to get old.  I grew tired, soI decided to spice things uponce again. I  sta rved them. Then,  I told them the only  way to  get  theirfood was to beat one ano t herup. The winner would eat. Howev er, that little contest  would be way too  boring, so Ithensawed off  eachof theirfour legs. I thenlet them at each other. They sprang lik e animals, biting punching each other. It was a slow proce ss, them havingno legs and little en ergy.B ut that made  it allthemore worth while. I wasevenkind of sad w hen finallythe weaker of the two wasknoc ked out. I knew I needed more. So then, I spiced things  u pagain. I told the still barely conscience oneth at in orde r to get his meal he would have tokillhisbestalien friend. He wasshocked.Ilaughed again.
So, I preparedthe murder for hi m slowly. I handed the syringe filled  with black licorice to the victorious ali en.Theloser alien then woke up,  only aw ake enough to see his own friend inject thedeadly dose of jelly beansin to hisbody. He d iedshortly, but boy was it massively entertaining.
The alien that was still alive cried, making  inaudiblenoisefor his   ja w wasbroken after all. He  demanded his jelly beans. It was no tpolite enough. His attitud e was simply unacceptable. So Ikicked   him in the gut. Ithrewhim against the wall and told him tobepolite.HE WAS THENKNOCKED OUT.HE COULDNOT PERF OR  M THE TASK OF ASKINGNI CELY.  HE HAD TO BE KILLED AT ONCE FOR HIS BRUTALMISBEHAVIOR.
Boy di d I love that experience. ButI wo uld not miss it. It was a lot of work. Jellybeans are costly after all. I ate my di nner slowly, savoring ev ery bite. Alien  flesh tastedso good. I knew it was all worth it. Even tho ugh Icould not cook well, I knew not to sweat it fromthe beginning. My plan had been agr eatsuccess after all.
DidI write it  correctly BookWyrm17? What do youthinkabout it?I think I did  it prettywell!
r/jesuschristreddit