Standing on the corner of a bustli ng city street somewhere  heavily populated in America stood a man, andthis man's namewas Alex.This story revolv es aroundAlex and his point of view, I will assureyou of that now so that
there is no further confusion. Being Alex's story, I do not feel the needto state where in America this is taking place, as that fact is i rrelevant to Alex today, and thus irrelevant to our story.
Alex was always a special somebody, Throug  hout his life constantly picking himself up  from fai lure after failurein search of greater value and wealth. But today was special asit seldom seems to be recently, Alex wasgiven
a small break from the monotony of this struggle by beingoffered a choice. As he passed by  a young child on the street asking for m oney, holding out a pitiful tin can whose grease marks closely resembled the same ones that were written across the child'sface. Dawningthe realization that he had a choice tomake here, that is, between understanding this  child's  pointof view, or passing along without so much as a glance as  so many peopleseem to do,
Alex made his choice. Knowing the nature of things and deeming himself as a man of g reat wealth, he indulged to sh are some of his value with this child. "A small price to pay, in the greater scheme of things", he silently
recalled tohimself, knowing very well of the repercussions this c ould cause for himself. He knowingly pulled out his wallet and quickly found a $5 bill stashed away for important times like these. With alook of deep understanding
of things, he told the child a small g limpseof his story, that which is not important to our story still. A ftersharing his great wealth, he handed the chi ld  a  ragged old $5 a nd was abo ut to leavebefore noticing that the grease marks, tears, and an ageless expression onthat  billwere strikingly  similar to that of the container it was now held in andthe face  that gleamed with excitement to havea chance at food and the permissiontodream freely at night. Alex took note
of this as he left with his chin up proudl y, he really was arich man. I suppose this is whereour short story must begin, so let us continue on.
Alex, being a man who knows of many things and many people,was actively looking to learn more and feel alive abo ut being alive that day. Knowing that a car was unneeded to transportyour self a round the city, simply walked with no
ulterior destination in mind, until a thought provoked him.He had not been in this part of the city in well overa month and knewofsome very close peoplethat he was glad to call his friends,even though their actions and involvement of tenstated otherwise.Alex called up an old friend that truly goes back to the beginnin g  ofhis story, A young woman by the name of Jane whom he had known since elementary school. Both had simply never desired to move out of the city.
Jane was apprehensive at first due to everything that consumes her busy, bustling life in the metropolitan. But with minor though t, found Alex to be a worthwhile man to talk to and confidein, they agreed to meet during a lunch break at a local coffee shop.
"Jane!" Alex enthusiastically exclaimed , greeting the young woman when she pulled up in a car outside of a nicer, well established coffee shop. "Alex! It's so goodto see you agai n! I never have any idea when I'll get the time to see you anymore" replied Jane.
"It's no worry, you've finally seemed to find abreak from it today, I'm really glad you were  able to meet up with me, lets grab some coffee?" Andwith a knowing nod, Jane took Alex'sarm and stro lledconfidently into  the cozy atmosphereof the coffee shop.
After avalueless exchange ofpleasantriesw ith the barista, they finally got their drinks and a chanceto speak with on e a nother at aremote corner of the shop, somehow evaded by others, eventhough that particular table provided the best natural lighting and relaxing atmosphere among them all. Sitting down, Alex suddenly found himself out of wordsand and his glance at Jane revealed the same.
Ohwell, better to sta rt from thebottom. "The weather today is something straight out of a m ovie scene, don't you agree? A little light rain h ere and there mixedwith some awfull y angry looking clouds, really makes you appreciate the calmness of what can happen to the world." Alex quickly stated, weather was always a good topic to start a conve rsation off of, right? Jane calmly replied, looking worried about what she was about to say "I really wish I could see the world from your eyes, Alex, today seems totally miserable if we're being honest, just like the  last number of them." Alex, wanting to probe further into
the matter responded back, "What's the matter? Wasn't it just last week you were telling me that you have beengiven the oppor tunity of of a lifetime?"
"Well, if we'rebeing honest, I certainly thought it was. Sometimes itseems the world just has nosympathy for wh at we go  thr ough and feels the needto add more and more weight on to our shoulders.""If you don't mind my curiosity, ca n I ask what happened to the deal?"
After asilent m oment that loudly stated Jane was in deep t hough, she relieved heranswer. "Yeah, I botched it up. It was supposed tobe a multi-million dollar deal, I wasfinally able to see a light at the end of the tunnel and I  let itget to me."
A moment of silence then passed, as Jane realized that Alex would not probe further, for she hadalready started ta lking. So she continued "The thought of beingmyown CEO, the feelingof really and truly becoming something,living a life that I would be proud to call my own. I just let it all get to me, I cracked  under the pressure."
After an unnaturally longsilence, she quietlymanaged to get out
"I was so scared, I didn't even attend the final meeting. I just s at t here until my time came, I stood up an d left the building. To be honestI've been a  nervous wreck since."
Alex, knowing the undoubtedly great impact that his words were  about to have, took a moment to compose himself before uttering a sound."First and foremost, I wa nt tothank you for being open and honest with me, it is these acts that make ushuman and who we are.Secondly, I do not believe that you madea bad decision."
Obviously perplexed by  his words, Jane managed to let out a  short sentence between borrowed breaths of air while holding  back tears. "what do you mean?"
Alex promptly replied, "You know far better than I do, the valueof m oney and wealth. If there was anybody in thisworld that I lookup to  on these matters, it wouldwithout doubt be you. I've seen the things you've accomplished,
and Iv e b een blessed to witness the blossoming of the seeds you have plantedfor  yourself. It's important that you don't confuse happeningsfor their face value, you never will have any idea where that business ve nturewould have
takenyou, and you likely never will. If  there is anybody in this world that is capable  o f building something from nothing, I know this  to be your calling."
Jane, obviously taken aback by the  words of her close friend, did not mutter a w ord forth e next amount  of time it took three or maybe fou r people to receivetheir drinks. Alex, knowing in some waythat he might have shared  some of his wealth,simply took t o understanding the environment  around him. Today really was a good day.
The rest of this meetingis of great unimportant to our story, and thus will endhere. Jane moved on that day with a great mix of emotions and desire, but also a fi ercemotivation to succeed the next attempt she made, though s he made sure not to share that for  fear of breaking it. And our
dear friend Alex moved on that day with a great deal of certainty, for he had planted a seed that,  if he is truly lucky,will get  to see  something b eautifulblossom from aconversation that was so ordinary and meaningless on
the outside.
First  t ime really coming out of my shell and attempting to share some workthat I can create, so please allow me constructive feedbac k and comments soI can further improve my craft.