The modernworld is currentlyfac ingasignific antchange under  globalization trendsth atshape economies , politics, the work place , education, and  even everyday behavior. Mostimportantly ,due totheactive exchange of information between people worldwide, c ulture is changing. Researchers try tounderstand whet h er the culture will be further homogenizedin globa lization or diversified. This paper will argue thatcu  lture will become more diverse under the influenceofglobalization due  to th e introduction of multiple cultural elements into societies.
Thelatestprocesses  in cultu ral  chan ge demo nstra tethat both sides of th e argument, namely t hose supp orting di versificat  ionand the ones claiming  homo geneity, have reasonable grounds . Onthe one hand, Cowen(2010)states    that ina glo balizedsocietywhere adominantculture prevails, diversity willbe substituted with the culture that is imposed on others t hroughsuch means as cinema. Ind eed,Hollywoodpromo te s Amer ican c odes aroundtheworld becausethe USc inemamarketis  the largest inthe world. Thus, globalizationallows Hollywoo d to reach all partsofthe wo rld, integrating thesame culturecode s every where.However, theoth er side of the argum entis more co mpelling because it considers the strengthsof  lo cal cultur es.  Inparticular,  an  exampleof sushi’s popularity  in American society and cultures of oth er nations demonstrates thatpeopleadoptnew cultural phenomenaw ith acknowledgment oftheir origin.According to Bestor (2010), “Japan rem ains the world’s prima ry market  for fresh tuna  fo r sushian  d  sashimi” (p.110). Th us,having integratedits p roduct   in to thecultu resof  other count ries, Japan  has expanded itsma rketshare.
Insuch a manner,with the ease of transportationandcommunication enabledby glob alization,t here is  a merge of cultures around t he world.However,sin ce market forces c om monly rule theseprocesses,the hos tcultures are aware oftheoriginsofthe borrowedcu l tural clusters. Therefore,to summarize the discussion, one might s tate that culture wi llnot be homogenized in glo balizationbu t rather  diversified with credit given to each cultural component.