The whole fiel d of astrophysics and  astronomy, in general, is quite perplexing. Therich history and si gnificant discoveries made by well-known scientists pavedthe way for  the technolog ical revolu tionsofthe 20th and 21st centuries.However, thesedistinct discoveries would not havebeen made without equipment. The articleThe telescope inthe seventeenthcentury writtenbyAlbert Van Helden, sheds light on the d evice and its sign ificantimport ance in the history of astr ono my.
Inthis article, theauthor mad e se veral strong arguments.In the beginning, he indicates that the telescope was used against the enemies asa   terrestrialinstrum  ent. How ever, with  the advancement and multiple improvements to the le nse,the writerindicates thatthe telescopestarted to be  appliedtomagnify objects (Van Hel den 1 974). According  to Van Helden,itwasthe telescope that madethe difference in science, and i tisthe main reason why astronomers encouraged the telescope-makers to work on lenses (VanHelden1974) . I  agreethat the telesco pe canbe the conduitof in formation forastronomers, and  with itshelp, they can  gather new data an dmake new discoveries. Neverth eless,I disagreethat it i s the onlysource of achievi ngsuc h signific antresultsin the a stronomy.
Consequently, as has beenmentioned by Van Helden,different methods of encouragement o f telescope makers were used. Th ere are also other sciences that contribut e to the developmentofengineering.Forexample, physic s and chemistryfocus on the appliance of knowled ge about fo rces,pressure, and chemicals and their combination. Themost recent devel  opmentsmight include the developmentof new technologies li ke phones or modern  motors forvehicles.  Moreover, whilethe advance ments have been so big, the re a re no f ields ofengineering which are p rohibited. Specificdevelopmentsmight be prohibited if theyjeopar dize thehealth or lives of people.The activityof engi neering is,therefore, control led by special laws. 
Hence, thedevelopment of   t  elescopesa nd the imp rovement of the lenses gave an impetus t o the a dvances in astronomy. While the telescopewasf irst used as a terrest rial tool, it soon became astronomers’ too l.  With the help of  telescope-makers and d evelopmentsof lenses, it  was p ossible  to makediscoveries.However, ot her kinds of sciences, such as physicsand chemistry, cont ribute to the technological advancements ofourtime. While thereare no strong prohibitions ofengineering, it is unlawful to jeopardize the healthorlives of people.