The sta rk chords of Tosca beginonce aga in; Scarpia's motive is the fi rst thing the  audience at La Scala Opera hear .Perhap s they arejaded by  it, but it still elicits within me fe elings from a bygo ne lif e.Soon we'll seeentrances from Cavaradossi and ofcourse our leading lady, To sca, f or ced to do theunspeakable and murder oneman totry and save another's life.PoorTosca; ifonly she  had known that Cavaradossi was truly given a stay of execution,perhaps  she wouldhave accepted Scarpia'sdemand   for intimacy.
The peoplewillthen shuf fle out of   the opera theatre, lazily critiquingth esameshow  that they've seen entirely too often here in Milan,and goout to  the caf és and restaurants thatthey'vebeen to manytimes before. Their lives, s e emingly on a loop,continueat their leisure ly pac e as I sit by  in mydarkened villa abovethe streets watching  thed ays pass by.
Acquaintances ofmine  always asked, "Whymove toMilan?" "You don't k now Italian, do you?" "Why now?" they'd ask with all the sincerity of a Hallmark Valentine's Day card. I' m not sure that I'd everhave an answer for them,because theywere right to q uestion mymo tives. Why choose to fundamentally  changethe eternal workings ofthe vampiriclife sty le ?
Forone, the Milanese chooseto stay out untilthe ungodly  hours  of1or2 o'c lockinthe morning, meaning thatmy food is usuallyspiked with theresidual alco hol from their Lombardyregion chardonnay  and pinot biancoby the pint.Howe v er, even getting p astthe ete rnalhangover thatis mylife, how do I avoidthat vi llainousvegetablethat the Italians seem to pu t in every dish: gar  lic.
Oh the dreadeda glio. For so often I took it for  granted duringmy timein Vienna . Stakes could beeasily enough avoidedwith go od pla nning (an internally locked coffinwit h  plentyof rei nfo rce d  steelbetweenmy fa ce and theworl d thatmightwi sh to destroy me), but the Austrians never b othered with garlic quite as often as they do here.
Perhaps Imight go back toVienna  anddine offthe simple people whosebeer  consumptionis admirableas  much  as it  isshameful. Perhaps I will get back to hearing the operasof Straus s an d Mozart, or maybe the occasiona  l performanceof M arsc hner's"Der V ampyr."Butfor now, I sit like Tosca, ina place Is hould neverwishto bewaiting for the right moment tomake my escape and be free again.  Now, this never sleeping cityof Mil anholds meh ostage with th e ta ste of deathon ever yon e's lips.