In theHeatofthe Night
The idea behind Supertom can be described as a trope used to make a black character  heroic.The  resu ltis a peculiar ima ge of amagicalblack, who is a minor or even almost  background character, whose mission is to help the  protagonist guide him. To show the audience that ethnic minoritycharactersarenot b ad people,  Supertom takes a  stepforward toh elp others.They usuallyenter into the lifeof a much more privil egedand, in p articular, almostalways white,the  central character, andin some way enrich the life of this main charac ter .Some examples of Supertom include Lucius Fox from Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight, Michael Clarke Duncan inTheGreen Mile , Bagger Vance in The Legend of Bagger Vance, and Uncle Remus from Song of the South.
Thus, a black characteris endowed with high achievements and extraordinary positive characteristics, and Supertom is  obtained. Mr. Tibbs is Supertom as he “is sm arter than all the white people,the best homicide detective inPhilade lphia, brave enough to facedown a l ynch mob,” and exhibits “a somewhat unexpected knowledge of varie t ies of plant li fe.” (Vera,156) He is a kind of racial Sherlock  Holmes.
In other words, t he relationship in themovie sugge sts  the kind of friendship betweenblacks and whites that Americans like to think of asaccurate,but that is not true in the cont ext ofthe time frame in which In the Heat  ofthe Nighttakes place. In the film, at no point or scene does Gillespie seem to reachthe  point of accepting Mr. Tibbs. At  best, at theend of the film, there  is a senseof indifference . Nothi ng in t hefilmfeels like a buddy moment, more like consta nt violence and  almost kidnapping. The  scenein Gillespie’s living room was the closest thing to friendliness. Thus, discussing this fi lm in relation to buddy  films pr oves tobe a difficult task.
Do the Right ThingInFebruary2020,two whitemen killed AhmaudArbery forallegedly robbing  someone. In March,two polic e officers broke into the apartment of BreonnaTaylor, who died fromtheir gunshots, duringananti-drug raid. Thencomes the culmination – Floyd’s death  in May. Therefore, despite the age of creation,Do theRight Thing does not lose itsrelevan ce.The theme of US racism is somehow displa yed in most of Spike L ee’s films,and the director’s  attitude towardsit is invariably critical. While the film u ltimately shows h owdangerous it is to rea ct tooth ers based on race, ironically, Lee portrays the charac t ers in the film stereotypica lly through their language and aesthetics.Spike Lee pa nders to stereotypes by using iconography to represent the variousra c ial groups in the film (Etheringt on-Wright236). He doesthis in various ways, such ashaving Italian-American characters wearcrosses and t-shirts. He also does this in his portrayal ofRadio Raheem with an Africa n locket necklace and a big boom box playing loud rapmusic. Eventertiary characters, for example, agroup of PuertoRican friends,are shown listening to  salsa,speaking Spanish, and d rinking be e r on the porch of their apartment  building. Duringthe film’s  culmination and t heverbal screaming fight between Saland Buggin’ Out,the former uses ra cial epithets, te lling Radio Raheemto tur n off the jungle music and using profanity. 
De spite the explosive denouement, one of the f ilm’s s trengths isthe complexity of its chara cters and the portr ayal of black  ness on screen. Lee went beyond thestereotypes of African Americans in movies and created characterstha t are reflected  in every day life. InDo the Rig h t Thing,blacks arenot represented in the traditional binary of inferiorandsmiling, aggressive  anddangerous, butrathercan exist asfuller expressions of themselves.