Th esocialdeterminants of health are the condition sin the envi ronment in whichpeo ple live,learn, wor k ,play, worship,  andage. I agree thatthe  social e nvironment in which p eople livecan affect their health sta tus.Health outcomes are not determinedsolely by biologic al factors or access toqualityhealth care (C enters for DiseaseControland Preven tion,n.d.). Resources that  improvethe quality of life can significantlyimpactthe hea lth of apopu lation.
Exa mplesof theser esourcesincludes a feand affordable housing, access to education, p ublicsafety, availabilityof  healthy food, local emergency s er vices, anda n envi ronment free oflife-thr eatening toxins (Office of Di sease Prevention and Health Promotion,n.d.). Ials o s upporttherecent shi ft in the view that it issole ly up tothe individual to influence theirhealthin favor of recognizingthe s ignificant  i mpa ct of ex ternal infl uencesonit. In the modern wo r ld,very little depends on the  individual.  At first gl ance, he can choose whatt o eat, whether toexercise, and whether toseek medical care inati mely manner.In fact, mos t of  the choicesthat affecth ealth are made by the marketing machine, the  government ,  and lifecircu mstance s. For ex ample, modern advertisi ng presses fromallsides, forcing one to  choose speci fic   products thatare  oftennot  c onducive to a healthy lifes tyle. The need to work hardto earn money forthese produ cts pushes people tosacrifice a  healthysleep scheduleand exercise.  This  chain   has  many lin ks, butthe result is alwa ys  the same: people’s healt h i s large ly not  up to them. External factors  alsoindirectly  affect health,such as health inequalities.WhenI read the CD C (2022) report on these inequalities, I was most sur prise d by the racial andethnicinequa lities.In an era of globalization and liberalization of society , aphenomenon  like racismmustb e eradicated. The field ofh ealth care is one in which treating peopl e equa lly is s ome times vital. That is why I  believe that racial and ethnic discriminationin this area must beeradicated in thefirstplace.