A house is more th an simply a place t olive;in fact, that is only one  description  of a house. A h ome is aplac e where one fe els more comfortable and looksforwardto living throu gh eve ryday. A house  is constructed notw ith stones ortimbers but withthe link of family. A p erson may own every mate rialistic property on thee arth, but itw ould be not very sensi  ble if he did  not have s ome one  wit h whom  to exchange it. Inother terms, expressing pleasure  is also linguistically tied to home. Additi o nally,home is more thana physic al location; it  is a state of mind. They share a sense of j oy and pleasure with their family members . A home is when one understands they are aroundindividuals who can run them nuts i n a second and make them feel good in thevery same second. Home signifies that no matter  what  one is experiencing or ho wdifficultlifebecomes, there will alw a ys be someone watching outfor them. When a person is secure enough to provide an honest a ccount of themselves, they know they willbe accepted d efinitively. For myself, I can single out afe w placeswhereI feel at home . This work w aswritten with the aim o f explaining one ’s own conce pt of homeand a place where a person feels at home.
For me, home is made upof memorieso f memorablemoments thatcontributedto shaping and teaching me. As a result,my houseis also peop le, a nd  when home takes on a  human figure, itisreferred t o as a family. I feel thatfamilyis a relative concept that is determin ed by connections rather than blood (Hess). No matter where Igo inthe future, this atmosphere and these individuals who have shapedmeas a human  and shown me how  tobehave will alway s bea str ong foundation forme. I knowIcan always return home. Indeed, the spirit is where the household is.
Since collegeis where people spend most of theirday,I feel at ease. My classmates, whom I have  known for m anyyears, are also at the same school.For instance, I have a friend in thesame class as me wh  ois like a sibling to me. We communicate a lot, a nd  he knows all of my secrets. I h ave kno wn him  foryea rs and consider him to be my best friend. All of my professorsare fa miliar to me, and  they are all delightful to me. T hey also instruct me andassist me with anyprob lems I may  have.
In thisway, I can summarize and express  whathomefor me is.  In this essay, like a home,Ishow myfamily andth e college where I study. For me, the fee ling of homeis the place where I c an return at any tim e, and if  not all, then onepersoncan definitely help me. Hom e is a s ense of ca lm and security,and for myself, I single out suc h a factor as communic ati on.Thehouse is the place where you studied something for  a l  ong time and communicatedwithpeoplewho,asa result,  became close to me.Feelingathome is  an essential feelingfor every person because it gives peoplesupport a nd faith in themselves and  theirlo ved on  es.