"Thing is, Nolan, criminals shouldn't feel offen ded at being calledroaches."
The reporter  raised an eyebrow at me  from across the coffee tabl e. We were in a Starbucks on a Friday night, full ofc hatty teenagers. Some times, eithe r one of  us would need to raise our voices to be heard. "Why is that, M r. Clay?"
Isipped my coffee. "See, we got one thing in commonwiththose dirty sons ofbitches. When the lightcomes on, we run."
"Yet earlier, you saidyou're different."
"Tell me, do you trust the government?"
 Nolan shrugged. " I don't think myopinion—"
"Answer the damned question."
"Not really. I mean, everyo ne knows they're spying on us. Even as a journalist, I don't always get to— "
"So if you ordinary folk don't trust the government, what makes you think criminals will? Come forth and let your  sins be washed away,as long asyou committed them in thisor that year, arbi trarily chosenby y our man in that big white house?"
I scoffed. "Was broughtup Christian, you k now.  Far as I know, o nly one fella canpardon you.  Humans ain'tso forgiving or forgetful."
Nolan's expression  becam e thoughtf ul. "Last year,  the  g ove rnment chose 2012.Fifty-sixpeop le cameforwardwith  confessions."
"I saw  the ne wspapers.Eighty murders in total, along with a bunchof petty crimes. Onewoman ate six of her neighbors' cats. Hilarious."
"Really? I don't seewhat's funny about that."
I laughed. "The cats? Who cares about the cats? I'mtalking ab out t he math. Eighty murders?There are several times that num berof homicides alone in New York City, let alone the state or the country. Doesn't that prove what I've been saying? Crimi nals don't want a spotlight on them. How many of those fifty-six ended up being re-arrested for other crimes inother un-pardoned years?"
"More than half." Before Icould interrupt, he said, "Let's revisit my earlier question. Why, then, are you keen on publicity?"
"You're making me blush. I don't know wha t you're ta lking about."
"1978. You murdered seven people. Or so you confessed."
 "E ight, actually.  She was looking for her mom and dad, and wouldn't stop crying."
Nolan blanched, but turned a page on his notebook. "1996. A shooting in Central Park.  Fifteen dead, including two police officers."
I shrugged. "I wanted to clear the air. The Russian mob was making their move;I  w as only defending myself.Everyone accused my organiz ation of  being responsible. But that's nothing compared to the bus bomb bank robbery in December."
"I understand you werearrested for that."
 "Released two years later when the gover nment decided to pardon that year." I leaned forward and motioned for him t o come closer. "Listen, you wanna know   what I think? The real reasonbehind these pardons?" His eyes gained a hungry  look. "Yes, you can write this down."
"I think the government just wanted a way topardon their ownpeople.You know, the assassinations an dtheespionageandthe sabotage and spying,on Americans b y Americans.  Those guys in  suits, working for all th ose thre e-acronym agencies, they do a lot more shit than us. Why els e would they pardon crimes from 1999to 200 1?"
Nolanlicked his lips anddidn't answer, jotting furiously.
Smirking, I leaned back. "Besides, when youconfess, youget a reputation. Respect. No,  not from local shrimps. The bi g players. 2001 was a pretty  great year for me. Sold a lot of intel to foreign players."
"Youdidn't confess that," Nolan said.
"Off the rec ord, p lease." I dra ined mycup of coffee and looked atmy watch. "Well, the biggest one was still 2012, of course.I believe you wro te  the article. 'Crimelord comes clean;  biggest theft ofthe century'."
"Man, those banks a nd financial institutions just don't getit, do they? It's the information age! Securityfirst;efficien cyand whatnot second. Twenty billion. Twenty and frickin' loads of zeroes. Tha t's what theyget for  underestimating Chinesetech."
Nolan nodded andflipped a page."Let's mo ve tothe big question, shall we? You're making a con fession tomorrowfor 2015 ; care to give  me thescoop?"
I gri nned."How about a riddle? The Vietnamese ambassador. Fourteentraincarriages. Can't be giving you everything , right? You a journalist, do some research. Texan governor. The four judges. The Syrian massacre."
Nolan gulped. "I...  I guess I have some reading todo."
"Sure you do. Well, I thinkwe'll be seeing each other in court tomorrow."We stood andshoo k han ds. As I turned toleave, a young man whose face was fullof piercings came up to me. "You Mr. Clay?"
I no dded.
He pushed a guninto my chest and opened fire. There was screaming, and a lot of peoplerunning, but I couldn't turn my head much from the floor. The boy backed away as Nolan crouched besi de me.
"There's  a reason why roaches don't show  themselves," he said softly. "Because, eventually,all pests meetthe same end. You're a big man, Mr.  Clay,but too arrogantfor your own good. Just because the government wouldn't touch you, do esn't mean we won't."
"And guess what?" He took  th e gun fro m the you ngman's hand andheld itagainst my temple. "Next year, when the government decides 2 016 was a great year, theywouldn't even holdthis against me."***
*Thanks for rea ding!Do check out [TheNonsense Locker](http://reddit.com/r/nonsenselocker) for more stories! *