Accordingto Kant’s p hilosophy,  the distinc tion between aperson and a thing runs t hroug h severalbasic criteria, largely related to independence and dignity.A thing isonlya means to finitude,that is, to any completion,while m an contains completion  in himself. Man differ s inhis fini tude from the infinity ofthe world , but h e is valuable in himself and cannotbeused as  a means.This determines autonomy, that is, the independence ofa person.  Implicit autonomy determines the  inner abili ty of a person to doanything and, accordingly,the abil ity to distinguish  betwee n good and evil. According to Kant, aperson, in contrastto a thing , has amoral navigator thatis common to everyone. It is because of the opportunity to master theconcepts of good and evil and usethem morally a persondiffe rs from at hing. A person cannot be used as ameans and therefore, unlike a thing, has no value.
Dignity should  be perceived a s an innate and inalienable traitof any person, rega rdlessof social institu tions, class, and experience. At the same  time, d ignity is notonly an internal conceptsinceit i ssomet hing  that can be given by one person to another, such as r esp ect or favor . This  means  that the concept  of huma ndignity may no t alwaysb e strictly intrinsic. Concepts about the transfer or innateness of dignitycan have a si gnificant impact on  medical practice. A doctor who believesth at itis they who givedignity to  other people by paying attention to them runs the riskoff alling into  m isconceptions that distort moral representations. At the same time, aphysician who professes equa l human  dignity and believesit is  intr insic is able to respect the patient’s  autono my. However, this, in turn, cancreate treatment dilemmas ifpatient autonomy conflicts with the specialist’s professionalism. In any case, a medical worker who professes human dignityas an in alien able  va lue  follows key principles of bioethics such as autonomy and justice more closely.
By theuseles  sness of dignity in medical practice, McLea n means that talking about criteria fo r dignityin bioethicsonlydistracts from the primary immed iate goal of treatment.  Somerville argues in her book that when dialogue in bioethics comes to ageneral agreemen t, the term dignity seems useful  and  relevant.Ifi t isimpossible to a gree,the conceptof dignity is depreciatedand becomes useless. However, the idea of dignity can vary and bedistortedin sucha way that the very dignity of a person will be humiliated; t herewill beno dignity  ina person. There is a constructionist approacht o human perception, inwhich the personality must meet the criteria to be conside red truly human. This is the thirduse case for this concept, in whichthe mi suse of this view be comes really dangerous.
A person canbe determined by a higher awarenessand cognitive ability, which determines the knowledge of their goal on Ea rth and moral criterion.However, some  people with mental disabilities may thu s actually no t fit the crit eria for beinghuman.Consequently, th eirexternal dignity will be diminished by those  who believe that their internal dignity is wo rthless.This is a terrible mistake in moral judgment and  is very dangerous for medical ethics.Mo reover, the question of human dign i tyarises in the cas e ofembryos and emb ryos,which sig nificantlycomplicates the issue of moral  responsibilityandgiving dignity to a person in the case of an abortion procedure. Thus,the external dignity of a  person comes fromthefield of social experience and the attitud e of other people to  a pers on, whic his mostvaluable in bi oethics and  medica l practice. The pursuit of dignity in each person can help a doctor maketruly valuable  ethical de cisions and can hel potherprofessionals make them.