Ingeneral,th e bu siness case forthe Centers for Diabetes appears to be posit ive since the project is closely aligned with the ne eds ofthe  community and the targets setby the AffordableCare Act (ACA). However,there are potential risks,as outlined  in detail in the SWOT analysis, which has tobeconsidered before the final decision ismade. This note will detail the risks for theCenters for Diabetes and propose potenti alwaysof mit igating them.
Firstand foremost, the idea ofa commu nity health center that addresses the communityhealth needs is closely aligned withthe value-based careand thecommu nity focus thatar e the targets set by ACA. M o reover, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Healt hy People 2030report cite s theneedtofocus on how health issues are managedfrom a co mmunity perspective and not an individual perspective. Hence, th ere is a threat ofother healthcarefacilities that receive rei mbursements from Medicare and Medicaid i n th e county choosingtocreatea similar initiative.This is because diabetes is a common problem in the Unite d States, affecting10%of the gene ral population and 14 % of the Hispanic and African-American community.
The only way to mitigate this risk is to begin marketing and outreach activities as soonasthe project is approved andthereis funding to support the further stages of operations. In this way, the communityw ill bec ome familiarized with the hospital and  the Ce nter, and evenif other similar initiativesarise,this Center willalready have an established brandimage, which can guarantee that it will als o  have visitors.
Thesecondsignificantissueidentif ied in the reportis the financial statements, since based onthe assessments, th e reimbursements, revenue,and grant funding will be insufficient tocover the costs of s taffing and o  perations. Hence, the reis a n eed to either add services that can be reim bursedunder ACAor obtain anadditional source of funding. Alternatively, t here can be an option  for cutting the costs,for ex a mp le, having fewer community workersor reduc ingthe expendituresassocia tedwith traveling to help ensurethat the fund s that thisCenter willhave be en covering these  expenses.How ever,it is a betteroption to request additional grantfunding as it is vital to makecertain that this Center addresse s the he alth education needs of the communityin aquality manner. Another alternativet o obtain additional funding would be to request help from thehospita l, asthe c ommunity center helps redu ce the number of compl ications and,therefore,expenditures needed to   care for th ep atients with d iabete s. Moreover, the hos pital can refer its patients to thehealth center to advocate for their healt h ed ucation andself-care, and in return, support the operations of this facility.
In sum mary, thisnote iden tifies the potential risksthat the Center f or Diabetes may face. The two mainconcerns thatshould be considered before the la unch of the  Center fo r Diabetes are the pote ntial threat ofother community initiatives addres sing the same health disparit y. This issuec an be  resolvedthroughearly outreach and marketing. The seco nd problemis the fundingissue, as the f in ancial statements make it clear that th e revenue andgrant will not be enough to cover the operationalcosts.Hence, the Center has anopti on ofadditional services,requesting  additional grants, or asking forsupport from the hospi tal.