IftheBoard of Governors of the U.S. Fede ral  R eserve  Systemdoes as expected early Friday and votes to expand banks'non-banking activities, it will  only heighten the drive in Co ngress t o overhaul  U.S. banking regulationscompletely,analysts andindustryofficials said.The Fed is expected to vote  to a llo w banks' section20 subsidiaries t o derive 25 percentof their rev enue from non-banking activities suchas securities underwriting, up from thecurrent 10 percentceili ng.  
The section20 proposalwas released for comment in July, butsince the nanother bankre gulator has stolen  someofthe Fed'sthunder.Comptrollerof the  Currency Eugene Ludwigsaid his office will begin approving bankaffiliatesmoving into an assortment of non-bankingbusinesses .Both the  Fed'sproposal and the Comptroller'sactions will ra isethe pressure on Congressto scrap the  Glass-Steagal l Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economicstudies at the Brookings In stitute.  Inthepast,ban ks ledthechar ge  to changethe law because they wantedto get into other bu sinesses,  like sellingins ur ance or underw riting stock deals.Insuranc e companies and securities firmsgenerally opposed t he banks creating legislative g ridlock."Nowthe tables ha ve been turned,"Litan said. "  But it'snota two-way street.Other industries will wantto levelthe  playing field." 
Both moves also reflectcu rrent market realities. Th e financial services industry, from ba nks to insurance companies  to  m utual funds,  is converging. Mutual funds already offerchecking account-likemoney market funds andsome of the leadingstock and bondunderwritersare commercial banks.In the words of onetopregulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "isnot material." The Fed has requiredbanksto take ce rtainsteps to pre vent problems in the  subsidiariesfromaffecting thebank itself, and itsgovernment-i nsured deposits.Competitors in otherfields fret that the  banks insured deposits area form ofgovernmentsubsidy giving the ban ks anunfair  advantage when they venture into other fields.
Comptroll erLudwigdisagreed. Speaking  to reporter s after del ivering aspeec h here Thursday, L udwigsaid that walling offthe subsidiary "basi callyeliminate s any subsidization."
He opposesefforts by some in Congresstokeepbankso ut of certain fields, suc has real estate or merchant ban king, e ntirely. "It's  a mistake to  setproduct limits, pa rticularly  in  this day and age whenwe have sucha dynamic marketplace," h e   said.