Britain'sBritan nic Assurance declared  on Tuesday a 209  million poun d ($336  million) special bonusforlife insuranc e policies, follo wing discussions with the governmentonownership of surplusinsurance funds.The payout will apply to  all"with profits"p olicies  inforce onFebruary 17, 1997. Detailswill be given withthe 1996 bonus due tobe announc ednext month.
The company s aid last year it discussing with theDe partment ofTrade and Indust ry (D TI)owner shipof long-term assets, and a way todistribute the surp lusto policyholders andshareholders.
 Britannic has now agr eed withthe DTI that 902mi llion poundsof theexcess assets within the long term  fu nd can be attributable to shareholders.
Br itannic al sosaid it intended to increase itsdividend forthe year by 82 percent to 23 pence per share following an increasein  lifeprofits.This would be  th ebasis forcontinuing the company's progressive dividendpolicy.
Thenews boosted Britannicshares, which jumped  71 pence, or nearly nine percent, atone stagebefore settlingfor arise of 29 pence at832.5.
Themoney attributable to  share holders forms part of total assets in the life funds whichamounted to5.682 billion pounds at the end of199 5.
Those assets  were estimated to have risen by theend of1996, Britannicchief executive Brian Shawsaid,andupdated figureswould be released onMarch 18.Britannic also announced arestructuring of its long-term funds and the result s of a strateg icreviewof its business.
The review willlead tonew  sales management an d premiu m collection systems, streamlining of head office and investment in market analysis and product resea rch.
The initiatives are expectedto cutoperating costsby around 25mil lion pounds, based on 1995figures.Britannic saidit planned t o build on its brand,investment management and distributions kil ls,financi alstre ngth andproduct development abilities to strengthen  itsposition and improveval ue to  policy and sha reholders.
Restructuringthe long-term fundwill create two continuing "withprofi ts"funds,one for its industrial branchand the  other for the o rdin ary branch -- life and pe n sions busi ness.
In future at least  90 percentof thesurplu  s in thewith pr ofitsfunds will be  allocated each year to with profitspolicies.The balance will beshareholders' p rofit for transfer to th  e prof  it and loss account.The company hasa lso createdtwo separa te non-profit sub funds -- one for life, one  for  pensions -- which will contain non-profits business and both ofw hich will be ownedby shareholders.The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by2 3 million pounds following thedec laration of the 209 mi llionp ound special bonus. ($ = 0.621  BritishPounds)