Oneok  Inc.and Western Resources I nc. onThursday agr eed to a $660 million deal that combines theirnatural gas assets and gives Western R es ourcesaccessto a broaderbase of customersfor its electricity and securityservices.
The deal reflects the moves within the utility industry to prepare f or furtherderegulation.
Under the agreement,Oneokwill take allthe natural gas assets ofWestern Resources, making it theninth largest gas distribution company in the United  Statesserving 1.4 mil lion customers. Tulsa-based Oneok is the parentofOklahoma  Natural GasCo.Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan.,will become the largest equityholder in Oneok, receivingabout 3million new shares of Oneokcommonstock a nd preferred stock that will be convertible, uponnece ssary regulatory approvals, into about another 19.3  million sh ares ofOneokcomm on.Its  total stake in Oneok is ab out45  percent. The deal is expected to close  by mid-199 7, following approval by Oneok shareholders andfederal and state regulatory authorities. 
"They (Oneok) are atotalgas company. They understand the gas business better  thanwe do," Western Resourcespresident David Witt ig said in a telephone interview.By swappingitsgasassets, Western Resources will be able to focu s it s efforts on grow ing itselectricity andh ome-security businesses, both of which in volve a customer base of home owners and 24-hour monitoring of consumers.Oneok 's735,000 customerscould becomepotential clients ofWestern Re sources' services.
"WesternR seources has been becoming a nationwidemarketer of retail energy --electricityand/or gas --and home security," Everen Securities analyst DanRudakassaid. "This combination gives themdire ct access to another 735,000 gas customers,  whichin the future ... wouldbepotential  electric customer s and also el ectronic homesecurity customers."
The co mpa nies saidthe alliance will position thecompan ies to ta ke adv antage of the expec ted deregulation of theelect ricity industry, allowing customers to buy electric alpower from several sources inst ead of justt he local utility. That type of deregulation is already taking place in the natural gas industry.
"Eventuallly there will be totalcompetition in ele ctricityand in gas," John HayesJr, Western Resources chairman , t old a teleconfer ence. "We are just preparing for the future."
The companies said Oneok'sindependence would be preservedby standstill provisionsin theagreement that d efinethe rights and respons  ibilities of the  res pective companies for at least the next15 years.
WesternResou rces willreceive a preferred dividendof 1.5 times the un derlying common d ividend , which now stands at 30 cents a share, but noless than $1.80 per preferred share per year for thefirst five years.
G eorge K. Baum analyst Denni s Hudson said Western Resources'  natural gas assets  earned thatcompany about $20 millionin 1995. As part of Oneok, the assets likely will earn more, given that company's ex pertise in g as distributions andsynergies fr om its existing  g as business.
With its sta  ke in Oneok, Western Resources wil l stillbenefit from a portion of thegas earnings, as well asfuturegasal liances thatOne ok mightenter intoin thefut  ure.
"Oneok would  continueto searchfor opportunities to acquire more customers on the gas side.We'remost supportive ofthat,"Wittig said.
He added that Western Resources contin uesto lookfor ways toexpand its electricityand home-security bu sinesses.