The business  world is ever-changing, andcompaniesmust always  be flexibletothese changes. One of the changes that a business might needtoadaptto isan expandin g target market. P&G currentlysells personal care products to amarketthatis comprisedprimarilyof women. However, research shows that there is a growi ng ma rket among male consumers  dueto  the rise ofmalegrooming. P&G should restructure to take advantage ofthe newmarket for men’s careproducts.
P&G will need to  make severalchanges to  capitalizeon the“ignor ed” market. Therestructuri ng will affect variousdepartments su ch as researchand development, product design, and salesand marketing. Their r edesign will affect their employee recruitment a nd selection practices(Szymczyk, 2016). Forinstance, currently, most employees that deal with skin an d hair care products, cosmetics, and fragrances are female.This is  because the target market is mostl y women, which meansthat the products are pr obably  developed, designed, andmarketedbywomen. To attract a new target audience of men,t he compan y will need to hire more male employees (Nadube & Didia, 2018). Maleconsumers will be mores atisfied with male-onlypersonalcare products. These products are best developed by people who are male themselves and understand what other men  wo uld want.  The research and  d evelopment, pro duct design,  and sales and marketing departments must comprisemorema leemploye es.
The main contextual variable that led to P&G’s restructur ing was the changes in the target marke t as revea led by a study. The study was conducted by Male GroomingTrends: Profiting in 2009 and  Beyond.  It show ed that although f emale consumers dominated the market for personal grooming products, the market for maleconsumers was quickly expanding. P&G saw anopportunity to profit froman expandingmarket.Therefore, redesigning wasnecessitated by changes in the market characteristics.
S everal companieshave restructured to capitali ze on alarger target market. Examples include Harley Dav idson Motor cycles,NFL, and Stryx. Traditionally, the de mographic market formotorcyclesw as olderwhite men. However,following a decreasein motorcycle sales, Harley Davidson startedtargeting femalecustomers (Moreno, 2017). Theycustomized their bikes to wo men’s nee ds and found creative ways tomarket these bikes to wo men. Second, the National Footb all League discovered ina study that womencomp ris ed o ver 40% of their viewership (Townes, 2019).They then expande d the irtarget market beyond theusual male customersand started to make  merchand ise for   women. Finally, Stryx is a companythathas capitalized on the growing market formale makeup products. The comp anies mentionedhave been widely successful in expanding their markets. Oth er companiesshould also capitalize on t h eir expa nding  target market. For instance, traditionally male-dominated gyms should consid er opening women-only gyms. Although womenare now exercising jus t as much as men, there are notenoughgyms for them.Overall, companiesshould be quick to adapt to changes in themarket.
In conclusion, companies should keep up-to-date with any changesin the market. All industries are constantly evolving, and itwould beunwise for business es to s tick to old ways.In the given case s tudy, P&G has the pot ential to generateprofitfrom a new market for person alcare products. It will ne ed to redesignits recruit ment practices to ex ploit this o pportunity. Rest ructuring for a new reality can be a  profitable venture if done correctlyas show n by Harley Davi dson,NFL, and Stryx.