Thearticlecomprehensiv ely describes the definition of an introv ert, thefeatures  of his behavior, and p ersonal attitudes in themodernmodel ofsociety. T his  category ofpeople oftenremainsmisinterpreted ina world focused onpredominan tly extroverted and energeticallyintense people. The pur pose of th e author is in  theclearlyexpressed desire to convey toso ciety thegoalsand wis hes of introverts, whosethoughts andfeelings oftengo unrecognized orneglected. A superficial analysis of thetextcaptures a vivid personal appeal of th e author and i ntensely e xpresse s subjective sentiments dueto individu a lexperience. A largenumber ofrhetorical questions  a t thebeginning of themessage immediately attract  the reader’sattention.Thearticleiswritten in a j ournalistic styl e andhas ab right emotional  coloring witha  hint of a pronounce d reje ctio nofthe global focus onextraversion.
The observant text analysis allows the reader to better u nderstand the personal messa geofthe  author. Thearticle is  well  structure d and  includes general questions regarding the life and world view of  introverts. The t ext is characterizedby ahigh degree of subjectivi sm and a pronouncedbias towar ds  the category of extrovert reader s. T he au thor comparesextroverts with “puppy dogs”who canlisten to a person for a minute an dth en start “barking” again.  Such a comparison is pejorative and may cau se an ambiguous reaction in the reader (Rauch133).Inaddition, the authordirectlystatesthat introverts are a more intelligen t, reflective, and sensitive category of  people. Every conclusionhasthe right  to be presented foracceptance; however, aratherdismissivetonetowardsextrov erts may, on the contrary,  cause rejection of the message.Theposition of the author is coherent and has the potential to find its re ader andsuppor ter. However, theaftertastefrom its reading is rather ambiguous and makes one think about the e xcessive   tende ntiousness of the writer.The t extdoesnot comp are two differentcategories of pe ople  but vigorously downpla ysthe  principal person ality traits of extroverts. The authorsays that  the wor ld would   be much calmerandsaneru nder the guidanceof intro verts.Thistheo rymay well be  valid  ; however, perhaps theworld should not be so sharply di vid  ed into “white” and “black,” “extroverts,” and  “introverts.” T his article  does agood job of its central purpose: to illustrate an alternative ra dical vision o f the modernmodel of society  separate dmainly bet ween extroverts and introverts.