These days never get easier. Actually, the days I like, that's whenI get to rest. It's when the sun goes down that things startto bother me.
You see that kid aboveme?Cute kid, good with his parents , and never ca uses any problems. I've seenhim out grow his crib and move into thisracecar bed withflames down the side. It's agood upgrade from the cramped spaceunder the crib, let me tell ya. I haven't seen the kid muc h outside of this room; the t ruthis I'm notallowed anywhere else.  Boss's rules, not his. I don't mind though, the view is good and I can hear everything  in thissmall house which makes me feel like I'm part of the family.
I like to think  he turned out alright since he gets such good re st at night, but I wouldn't wantto take too much credit.To be honest, I've n ever actually met the kid. When  he first movedinto the new bed,hisfather was in herejust before the lightswent out .For  what s e emed  like months t he father would come in a nd lis tento the boytalkabout his fear of me, the Boogeyman. Hewould come in and say:
"Taylor, buddy it's alright. The lights g o out, but everything isfine."
To which the boy would  say "But dad I  know he's in here".
"It's just your mind playing games with you. Iknew weshouldn't have l et you watch the movies with mom and I last Halloween." The dadsaid jokingly with a smile on his  f ace.
Taylor didn't want his dad to think he wasn't  readyto bea big boy so he shouted"Noway dad,Icanhandle anything!"
"Okay then bud, sleep well. Rememb er it's justlike  any other night."  Thedad saidas he t urned o ut the lights and s hut the doorbehind him.
Maybe another night foryou Taylor, but I'll be busy.
I mean, how this kid canbe scared of me when we've never met!
I've tried  to come out and  say hi a few times before , but every  time thiskid hears the  slightest  noise I can sense he gets wo rried. So I stickdown here and haven't moved since.  Not that I  get much spare time to even come out, bu t one day would benice.
You see, where I'm fromis a rou gh part oftown.It's notyour ordinary town with the kids playing out front of their homes with white picket fences. As a  matter of fact, no one in Taylor's wor ld knows my world even exists. Sure , ev eryone around seems to  g e t along,b utat night the realc reeps come out. Theseguys like to  cause proble ms and they  can do that to ea ch other. I wish they would keep it amongst the other monsters, but they don't. It's when they start seekingthe smallonesfo ran extra rush tha tboils my blo od and Istep in.
You see these guys nigh t after night go out seeking kids like Taylor. They don't even call themkid s;t heycall them "desser t"… real sickos.. Luckily, for the lit tle ones they've each been assigned their own "Boogeyman" to make sure they stay safe and don' t get snatched up. Sowhen I hear Taylor tell his dad that he is scared o f *me*, it hurt s.Ifonly Taylor knew what figh ting  these bastards was like. You've got Aeran with his scaledskin and claws the length  of a cablecar. How about Zeila with s piked arms that burn like hell when they hit you, not to mention she's twice mysize.Don't want to leave out Leera. Yeah he's small, but lightening  fast with a ferocious bite. It'salways the small ones t hat give you the most trouble. Yeah I  get lots of bumpsa nd bruises in this l ine of wor k. I'm fortunat e enoughI can  he al fast. If I  wasn't trained  for these guys then I would have prob lems and by problem I mean dead. And withme  dea d that means the creeps win and they w ould have their feast. Sounds bad but really though, it's all in anights work.
I lovemy job, I really do. Might sound  weird after hearing that everynight I'm busybeating up the bad guys, but hearingTaylor's laugh in the day  is what keeps megoing. I just wi sh thekid  knewthe truth. Allthose noises Taylor hears in the nigh t are just me doing my job. Makingsure Taylor stays warm and asl eep  in his bed. And fo r that, I'm the one he worries about. Iwould love to actually meetone of these kids I get to watch over, but it hasn'thappened yet. Ta ylor isn't my first and won'tbe my last, but I still have hope. Gotta run, I can hear the chatteringofclaws on the pavement  heading myway.  Sleep  tight Taylor…