The problem of un authorized termination of life is the source of numerous debates. On the part of religion, this problem has several flaws at once, the most important of which is the commission of a great sin before God, who gives people li fe. Moreover, the negative consequen ces of euthanasia are the devaluation of human life, violation of the equality of people before the law, medical duty, an d the structur e of the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, it c an be concluded that the spread of the popularityof euthanasia will lead to a complete loss  and restructuring of the system of human values. This paper examines the casestudy of George, who has fallen ill with a severe illness that will eventually completely deprive him of mobility. Because of thenegative emotions that have overtaken and the understanding that the disease is incurable, the man thinks to solve the pr oblem by euth anasia. Hence, using literary sources, a scientific paper analyzes the problem  ofintentional death and religiousconsiderations.
 In the modern world, despite the relatively progressive development of medicine, people are faced with diseases that,unfortunately, do notrespond to any treatment.In such cases, theblow that the disease inflicts both physically and mentally can be tough to bear. Because of the fear of losing self-care and dignity, people are thinking abo ut eut hanasia or, i n other words, voluntary suicide. However, this statement contradicts God’s attempts to restor e the Christian religion. Thus, this scientific  paper explores a thematic study about a man who has lost hope and is thinking about euthanasia.
The case study, which is the basis of this researchpaper, presents the reader with thestory of a middle-aged man George. He leads an average lifestyle, works, spends time with his family,and devotes time to his own in teres ts. However, one day a man be gins toexperience muscle weakness and immunity to muscle coordination. Subsequently, he gets injured, and when hegoes to the doctor,he gets a far from satisfactory diagnosis. According to the results of further tests, George is diagnosed with such a severe and terrible disease like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This disease is expressed inthe disruption of the nervecells of the brain, which are responsible for the muscles and spinal cord (Westeneng et al., 2 018). The mostfamo us representative of aperson with this disease is the great scientist StephenHawking (Westeneng etal., 2018). Deviation leads to the complete demobilization of a person,but aspects such as smell, touch, sight, hearing,and taste remain .
George was informed that ALS currentlyhas no treatment,and itsd evelopment can only be suppressed by certain drugs, but scientists ha ve not yet found ways to stop the disease. This  news can plunge into deepshock and depression and cause alot of strongnegative emotions and confusion. That is what happened to George, who was terrified  of  being a wheelchair user and delegating all the responsibilities of fulfilling basic needs to his family members. The idea of becoming dependent andlosing control of his own body did not give the man peace of mind, and therefore h ebegan to think aboutmaking life e asier for his relatives by resorting to such ameasure as euthanasia.
The problem of using euthanasia is acute in modern society. In the United States of America, this measure  hasbeen leg alized in nine regions (Hoehner, 2001). The main argument held by supporters of this intentional te rmination of life is to get rid of prolonged agony to death thanks to the development of medical  technologies (Orr , 2001). Despite this, the spread of this method of de ath can lead to high medica l costs for the families of pati ents, since due to low legalization rate,euthanasia is a costly service. The opposi teis the opinion ofChrist ianity, which denies euthanasia. Fo r this faith, the main emphasis is placed on the fact that the near-death period is characterized by love,compassion and reconciliation, and care, which  euthanasia deprives a person of.
The mainproblem with regard to eu thanasi aon the part of theChristian religion is the fact ofviolation of the law of God. Thus, the Christian doctrine emphasizesthat God gives a person life and determin eswhen to take it away.Euthanasia implies that patients decide the dateof their deatht hemselves,which is equivalent toone of the mainsins of religion – suicide.Despite the factthateut hanasia involves the introduction of a particular drug by a medical  specialist and not by a patient, it is the patient who is responsible for the decision tak en in this case. Sources al so emphasize that“Doctors mayhelp theirpati ents to di e a dignified deathfrom natural c auses, butthey  should not kill theirpatients or help them to kill themselves” (Anderson, 2015, p. 1).Thus, in the eyes of religion, this action is also a sin since it can already be considered as intentional murder, that is, the decision to take someone else’s life.
In addition, the scientific literature provides several ma in reasons not to support eutha nasia. One of t hem is the intro duction of risk for the weak and defenseless. Moreover, givi ng the doctorre sponsible for ta king someone’s  life can significantly negativelyaf fect the doctor-patient relationship. In addition, it is also worth emphasizing the violation of relationships within the patien t’s family and will violate such fundamental concepts as human dignityand equality before the l aw (Anderson, 2015). Supporting the Christian point of view, people should not help otherstokill themselves but provide the necessary level of care and  support to soften and bring  calm into the life of the patient.
On the one hand, in the light of the Christian narrative, George’s  sufferings can be interpreted, as already mentioned, with anemphasis on the sinfulness of the world. This is due to thefact that euthanasia is considered suicide and cannot be justified by religion. On t he other hand, the fear  of future loss of control over their lives and loss of dign ity significantly affect the patient.When considering the emphasis on the hope of resurrection, then the experiences of a man can be interpreted as a desirefor a speedy meeting withthe almighty. Therefore, George may feel the unwillingnessto be in this worldas a burden for his family, and in someways, the motiv ation of a man can be understood.
The Christian worldview highlights human life asthe most critical value. When turni ng to religion, a person becomes fully aware of how sinful thoughts about  taking his own life are be cause this is theprerogative of God. Thus, George’s view of the problem of living with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis may be changed. To facilitate the patient’s thoughts, shifting his thoughts in a more positive direction is necessary. Hence, it is necessary to show how important he is to his family and how priceless the moments spent with them will be until his death.
Further, based on the above, the Christian faith denies the use of euthanasia as it contrad icts the central values and con siderations of religion. Firstly, thevalue of a person’s l ife,which is given to him by the Almighty, is violated (Reese, 2019). Secondly, euthanasia is considered as voluntary suicide, that is, one of the greatest and gravest human sins. Thirdly, the promotion and dissemi nation of the populari tyof this event can  destroythe idea that human life is worth living,and p eople are ob liged to support each other’s desire to continue livin g.
Thus,itcan be concluded that there are no options for justifying the procedure ofintentio nal termination of life in the Christian worldview. All those factors that were listed earliercontribute tothis argument.  Based on my worldview,I can say that I consider euthanasia  an easy way to solve problems, which is not a positive aspect. Hence,I believe that life cannot be stopped simply by wishingit since the Almighty has prepared a unique path and purpose for each person. However, I cannot be entirely su re of my opinion since I havenever encountered situations like George’s fromthe case study, and I hope that I will never e ncounter them. Such a statement is since a person’sbehavior ina stressful situation can change dramatically, but I hope that I will be able topreserve dignity a nd reason to make the right decision.