Chi na's usu allyrubber stamp parliame nt failed on Monday to  pass an anti-c  orruptionbill after the proposed la w fell victim to fierce debate over whethe ritshould specifically target govern ment officials.
State media had reported heateddiscussionat the week-long session of the standin g co mmittee of the N ationalPeople's Congress, or pa rliament, that closedon  Monday.Disputes among  China's usually tame lawmakers ranged from controversy su rrounding  the scope ofthe death pe nalty  as contained in proposed amendmentsof thecrimi nal law to whether corrupt state managers shouldbe executed.
The draft law on administrative supervision, which would target corruption a ndhad been due to  be a dopt ed this week, waseventu ally  withdrawn from v oting, the Xinhua n ews agency said. The law waswithd rawn "because legislato r s sharply disagreed with the  name ofth e  law", itsaid, quotingparliamentchairman Qiao  Shi.
Some lawmakers believed the bill shoul d benamed the  LawOn Administrativ eSupervision in line with its regulati on of the government.
Howe ver, theyran into opposition on constitu tional grounds from legislators who argued itshouldbe called simply the Lawon Supervision,withoutreference to the administrati on, Xinhuas aid, butdid not elaborate.
Qiao suggested  the issue b e p ut for wardfor avoteatth enextstanding co mmitteesession in February, 1997.
Beijing has  launched repeated c rackd ownson  graft, which senior le aders have called a ca n cer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but manyChinese sa y enforcement  of anti-corrupti on  measuresat senior l evels  is patchy at best.
Debate had swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define draft anddereliction of duty, whileincreasing  to 32 from seven the types of offi cials subj ec t to thelaw, state media  said.
One source of c ontention wasthe designation of manager s of state firms as gover nment employees, who are s ubject to a maximum  penaltyof death for co rruption, itsaid.
One bodyof opinion he ld that government factory mana ger s be defined as public servants since75 percentof all official cases of corruption involved  state enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfa ir since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 ye ars in ja il for graft.
All should  beequal beforethe law, the new spaper quoted thecriminallaw as saying regarding   the needtotackle corruption
The failur e of the anti-corruption law to pass came as senior leaders consideredwhether to punish scandal-hit fo rmer Beijing Party bossChen Xitong --the highest-ranking victimof China's anti-corruption campaign --for derelic tion ofduty.
Unde rthe law, prosecutors wouldhave the powers to investigate a suspect's bank account and ask the courts to freezebank accounts of those suspect ed of graft, bribery andembezzlemen t.
Inthe first 11 months of 1996,  Chinese prosecutors had be gun action in 77,611 cases ofcorruption,bribery an de conomic crime and haddealt with 33,879 cases, up year-on-year 9.4 percent,the media said.Corruption was virtually wiped out in the  years  after the communiststook over in 19 49 buthas st aged a comebackafter economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago.