In a move that has raisedeyebrowsbothlocally and internationally, t he Chinese government has accused  veteran dissident Wan g Xi zhe of illegally cro ssing the border and pu rsuing those who helped him do so.
Wang,a well-knownfigurein t he Chinese dem ocracy movement, hasbeena thorn in the s ide of the ruling CommunistParty for decades. He was last arrested  in2014for speaking out agai nst governmen t corruption and sentencedto eight years in prison.
Howev er, in De cember 2020, news emerged that Wang ha d managed toc ross the border into Myanmar, where he  had sought thehel p oflocal pro-democracy activists. It was reported that hewas hoping tomakehis way to Thailand, where heplannedto seekasylum.
The Chinese gover nment has  since accused Wang ofviolating its national  securitylawsby leav ingthe country illegally and engaging i n activities that could be harmful tothe state. Chinese a uthorities have  labeled Wang a "criminal s uspect" and  issued an international warrant for his arrest.
In a statementre leased via state media,the Chines e embassy in Myan mar accused Wangof "breaking Chinese law  by  leav ing the country illega lly and engaging in activities that end anger national security."
The embassy  went on to say that  Wang had "colluded withforeignanti-China forces, accepting their support andfu nding, and s tepping uphis anti-Chinaactivities."
The statementalsoincluded a w arning  t o anyone whohad provided support toWang du ring his escape fromChina. Chinese authoritiessaid that  they would  "punish severely  those wh o havebeen colluding with Wang Xizheand provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move bytheChinese government has been criticized  by human rights g roups and pro-democracy activists, whosay that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown  on dissenta nd freedom ofexpression.
"This isa clear attempt  to intimida te thos e who dar e to  stand up againstth e Chinese government and speak the truth," said AmnestyInternational'sChin a researcher, W illiamNee. Nee went on to sa y that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese governmentwas pursuing those who had helped Wa ng during his esca pe from  Chin a. "This is aclearviolatio n oftheir basic human rights," hesaid.
The case has also raised concerns among Myanmar's pro-democracy movement, whi ch has been  grappling with its o wn pol itic al crisis since the military coup in February 2 021. Many pro-democr acy activists in Myanmarfea r t hat the Chinese government willpressure the Myanmarauthorities to extradi teW ang to China.
However, in a statement, Myanmar'sM  inistry of Foreign Affairs said that it had not receivedany request forextradition from the Chinese gove rnment.The m inistry wenton to say that Myanmar had "always adhered to the princip le of non-i nterference inthe internal af fairsof other countries" and "always respectsand protectsthe rights of political  asylum seekersin accorda nce with international law."
For his part,Wanghas remained defiant  in the face of theChinese  government's accusations. In a statementreleased through his lawyer,Wang said that he was "not afraid" of the Chinesegovernment and would continue to speak ou t for democracy and  human righ ts in  China.
"I  believe that th e Chinese people deserve freedom, democracy, and human rights," he said."I willcon tinue to f ight for thesevalues until theyare achieved."