The Toronto Stock E xchange ( TSX) announced yesterday that it will bechanging its rules governing cont rol blocks, a movethat will havea significant impact on larg e-c ap Can adian stoc ks.
The new rules will require anycompany that owns a controlblockof shares to have a majority of independent directors on its board. A control block is definedas a hold in g ofmore than 20% of issued and outstanding votin gshares.
This change is part of the TSX’s effor ts to improve corporategovernance and increase transparency in the market.  The TSX believes th at havinga majority of indepen dent directors on the board will ensure that all shareholders are treate d fairly and that the c ompany is run in the best interest of it s stakeholders.
Th e TSX h as been wo rking onthis rulecha ngefor several months in consultation wi th stakeholde r s and industry experts. This change is expectedto come into effect lat er this year .“Thisis an important step forward forthe TSXas weseek toenhance the quality of  our ma rkets and e n sure that issuers comp ly with the hi ghest standardsof corporate governance,” saidLou Eccleston,CEO oftheTMX Group, which owns the TSX.
The rule change is expected to affecta number of large-capCanadian stocks. Many of these companies have control blocks  owned by  founding families, w hich will now have to ensure that they ha ve a majority of independentdirectors on their boards.
Some expe rts predict that this rule  change willlead to i ncrea sed activism among shareholders, whomaysee this asan opportunity to push for changes in the governanceof th ese companies.
“Investors will now have more powerto pushfor improved governanceandgrea ter transparency at companies with control  blo cks,” saidSandra Levy, a corporate governance expert at Schulich Schoolof Business.
Th ere areconcerns, however,that thisrulechang e m ay lead to less  liqu idity in them arket, as some of these founding   families may bereluc tant to sell their stakes and dilute their control. 
“We coul d see asituat ionwhere these foundin g families beco me evenmore entrenched and lesswilling togive up  co ntrol,” sa id  JohnSmith, a securities lawyer w ithOsler, Hoskin &Harco urt.
Despite these c oncerns, many industry experts believe that this rule change is a positive step for theTSX andforCanad ian compan ies.
“This is a welcome development for the Canadian market, which has been criticized in t h e past for lax governance  standar ds,” saidLevy.
Th e TSX has madesignificant strid es i n improvingthe quality of its markets in recent years. In 2017, it in tro duced a new ru lerequiring issuers to have a majori tyof independent directors on theirboards, an d it has sinceimplemented several other initiatives aimedat  i mproving corporate governance and increasing transp arency.
TheTSX’srule ch ange on cont rol  blocks is  the latest in  aseries of measuresaimed at makingCanadian companies more accountable to theirsh areholders andensuring that the market  oper ates f airly an d efficiently.