Itstarted with spice.
They say marijuana is a gateway drug, but compared to spice it might  as well be afortress wall. Spice opens  the floodgates and when you're drowning it appears as a life preserver with a hole in the side.
Ever since I started I could n ever shake the feelingof paranoia; thatI' dbecaught , that  my friends would plot agai nstme, that I'd getkicked outof my home.  My neighbours would y ell at their kids to get  back inside their apartment whenever I walked down the street, high as a fuckingkite, waving my arms likea madman and shoutingobscenitiesthat I had made up on the spot.
I could hear them from the windows, even if they were closed. They spokeloudly and freely with the assumption that the druggie from upstairs wastoo wasted to payatten tion, and toofar gone to care if he could.
The regularity and alacrity with which they reacted to my home co ming was astounding, until I pu t the pieces together. The paranoia, the gossi p, the need for"security" - I was being monitored. Those bastards had put up cameras  in theneighbourhood so that  they would always know when I came d own the street.
That didn't matter though. Their opinions were justas shitty  as my life was . I had spice a nd the rest of the world could go to hell. I started  closing my windows when I realized I was being watched from the street,but the complaints and insults never stopped. I knew immediately why.
My room wasbugged! Those assholes had snuck into myroom while I was out and plan tedfucking cameras everywhere! I tore my room apart. I rippedmy mattress apart,  I emptiedall the cabinets onto the floor, I took a hammer toseveral walls, but I could neverfindanything. They were better than Iwas. They kept talking about me. They still could see  m e.
After I tore down most of my bedroom's drywall I realizedthe truth. They didn't have any surveillance - they had tel epathy. Th ey were inside my head. My  thoughts were probably transmitting  like  a fucking satellite di sh because of thedrugs. I had to know for sure. I had to put it tothe test.
I sat down inthe only remaining chairand focused my thoughts to my bitch neighbour below me in 405. Almost immediately  I heard her cackling,  grating laugh in my head.
"Look who's finally figured itout! Ha ha ha! What a fucking retard junkie! No w you're discovered our secret, little boy. What do you wan t to donow? Ha  ha ha!"
For a brief moment I thought I might have schizophrenia, but anew voice entered my brain.
"You serious, kid? You think you're crazy? No, you're just worthless, aworth les s sack of shit  who takes spice insteado f advice.  Listen up, because we're goingto let you know a little secret. You know the guy in 215? He's the one who's beeninstalling ca meras. He's the one who lets us know when you walk down the street. He's the onewho thinks you're the dumbest motherf ucker on the whole goddamn  planet, and he's play ing you like afucking violin."
"He hates your guts, little boy," the woman responded."He wants you gone, ha ha ha! He's goingto kill you- one wayor the other! Perhaps you'll put a bullet in your own brain  and save him the trouble?Do one good thing in y our life."
I ran out of thedoor and nearly jumped down three stories to get out of the apartment. The wicked l augh s of my neighbours followed me halfway down the street. I kept running until I hit a beach,  thesound of blood rushing through my ears temporarily muting the jeers from my apartment. When my heat f inally slowe d, they returned, albeit much morequietly.
Because they were so much mo re quiet, I was able to hear a new voice coming from a nearbyparked car.Hewas telling me to kill myself, to jump off a cliffand end it all with a single crushing thud. I co uldn't see in the tinted win dows, but the voice sentshivers throughout my body and I took off running again.
I returned to the apartment,andso di d my neighbour's laughter. This time, however,  the same parked car I had run into at the beach was already  parked in front of my building. A muscular man rolled down the passenge r side windowand glared dire ctly atme without blinking. I  couldn't hear his thoughts, but somehowknew that he meant to do me harm. I quickly ascended the stairs t o my room.
"Listen, kid, do us all a favour.Do  your family a favour.You love  your family,don't you? Well, we know where they liv e. It would be horrible ifwe were forced to godown and kill them one by one, wouldn't it? Wouldn't  itbe mucheasier to just kill yourself no w?Save your family.""Ha haha! Th ere's no helping you  n ow! You're hopeless,useless, worthless, garbage andthe world would be better off without you breathing my children's airand eating my husband's food."
"Are you alright?"
I paused. That  wasa new voi ce. A calm voice that cut through the sea of tortuoussirens thatclamoured for my death.
"If you need help, come to us. Cross the street."
Their v oice kept  coax ing  me out, silencing all others. I descended the stairs in a kind of stupor,forgetting about the bitch in 405 andthe man from upstairs. I crossed t he street and walked onto their patio.When I arrived, they looked atme like I was scum. "What the fuck you want?" a young man asked me, cockinghis head threa teningly to the side. "Youlost?"
I wanted to shout "Youmusthelpme! There is a man in my apartment that can read my thoughts and is trying to killme!" but even as I thou ght it I knewhe wouldn't believe me. I didn't believe me. There was  only one option.
Iclimbed to the roof of the nearest building andsteeled myself for the fall. Iwas getting ready to take a runningleap when my mother's face emerged from the kitchen window inourapartment.The look on her face filled me with dread and guilt. I couldn't bearto do it, and rushe  d back to my room , locking it beforemy mother couldcome inside. I ran abath and tried to drown myself in it, but every time I came close to blacking out my body would push itselfout of the water and gasp for air, convulsing violently.
Will continue later, I'm off to bed. Hopeyou like it s o far.