Sev eral high tech giants  have come  together to announce t he release of anew CD -ReWriteab le technology for early1997. The technology issaid tobe pric ed below $1,000, which is expected to make it widely ac cessible to the  public.
The CD-ReWrite ab letechn ology was unveiled through ajoint press conference by Hewlett-Packard, Sony, and Ph illips. The newtechnology isexpected to revolutionize themarket asit allows people to rewri te ove r CDs, which bringsthestorage capacity of CDs to a whole new leve l.
The CD-ReWriteabletechn o logy  has numerous applications,e s  peciallyin the realmof archivingand data stor age.Itprovides an affordable and efficient method for people to store and save their files, which was once a daunting ta sk, espec ially when it comes to largefiles anddata.
The technology easilyoutclassesother available optionson the market since it can store upto650 megabytes of data,about 74 minu tes of audio,in a single dis c, which is more than double what curren tly av ailable technologycanhandle.  Mor eover, since it is rewritable, itca n be used repeatedlyto store  new files and data  multiple times,making it ahighlyeconomical solutio n.
The new CD- ReWritea ble  technology is aresult of yea rs-long researchand development by t hethreehigh techgiants. It is based on a technique called phase-change technology, which allows the l aser beamto rewrite th e  data  o n the discatvarying speeds withoutcompromisingt heintegrity of the data alreadystored.
The technology is expec ted to have a significant impacton   the market, especially for small businesses and individuals who need cost-effectivesolutions to store their data. It is alsospeculat  edthatitc ouldlead tothecreation of newmarkets for CD-ROMs as the re-writable featu re allowsfor the st orage of dynamicdata that isupdated regularly.Moreover, with the releas e of the CD-Re Writeabletechnology, consumer s can expe cta dropinthe price of standard CD-ROMs sinc e the market will beopened up to more economicalalternatives.
"Thisis  an exciting time for the i ndu stry and for a ll those who need to store a ndaccess their data regularly," said KoichiSuzuki of Sony. "Thisrelease  will allow for the efficient management of files and the creation  ofnew opportunities within the market."
The CD-ReWriteabletechnology is a welcomesight for many people asthey no longer need to worry about t heir data being lost or compromised. The  technology i sexpected to be ahit among s tudents, research ers,  andprofessionals , who generat e a large amount of data  and need easily accessible and reliable storage solutions.
In conclusion, the release of theCD-ReWriteabletechnology is abreakthrough in the field ofstorage technology, anditis expected to havea significant impact onthe market. The technology's high capacit y and affo rda bility make it anideal choic e for people who need to constantly manage and store data. Furthermore, thetechn ology could createnew  business opportunities, especially forsmall businesses who  need to efficiently store their vital information.