Royal BankofScotland, w hich reports full year data next Thursday,is expected toraiseits pre-tax profit fromlast year's 602millionstgbut not byasmuch as analysts thought just a few months ago.They expect Roy a l Bank's profits to rise to   between 670 and 700 million stg,with amuch smaller contribution from its Direct Li nelow cost insuranc e, but benefits  continuing to  accrue from the bank's efforts to reduce costs.
Total dividend is expecte d to be around 18.6 pence a share versus last year's16.2p.  Thepre-tax figures will be complicated b y an ex ceptional gain from Ro yal Bank's disposal of its  50pct st ake in Germa ny's CC Grou  p,  fromwhichit said it would make 70 million st g, and by restructuring costs of around 23 millionpounds  stemmingfro m anacquisition by i ts New Englan d subsidiary Citi zens. 
Forecas ts for Direct Line vary  widely butanalysts are generally pessimistic, with the company's main market -- motor insurance-- going through  "probably the most diffucult period inits history", as  chief executive Ian Chippen dale tol d Reuters in an interv iew last week.  
"I think Chippendale was sending a strong message," said one analyst who declined to  be named. "I thinkh e was softening up the market for a poor set of results."
Some analysts  suspectthe results may not be quiteas poor as  hsbeen feared by some.
They see  t he core bank as continuing to performquite well with the  positive res ultsof its "Project  Columbus" hel ping costs and in come.
David Pout ney  expects a pre-tax profitof 69 5 million stg , which    includes the exceptionalitems , while B ZW  analystsexpect 675  million.  The market received a big clueon the performance of  Citizens f rom the recen t resu lts of BankofIreland  which  owns 23  percentof the operatio n."Citizens is doi ng reasonably well,"Poutneysaid, bu t analysts sayit is being  affected by the rather lacklustre New England economy.
The market wil l be expectingimp rovement in the cost incomeratio but an alysts say that ev e n a ni mprovementthis timewillleave the bank plenty  of scope for improvement.   
Themarket will b elookingfo r further clues onlending which showed good growth, mostly incorporate lending area,in the first half.
I nevitably, Ro yal Bankwillalso be watchedfor signs of a c quisitions.
It is known tobe interestedin buying abuildingsociety to extendits presence in England bu t in the current climate, it isunlikely to  be willing to  pay  the high prices likely tobe asked.
In any case,analystssay Royal Bank would ha ve to raise cash to b e able to perform any majoracqui sition. 
In the meantime, the market willbe looking to its relationship with mutuallyowned insurance and pensions firm Scottish Widows, whichsome think may r esult in an eventual merger.
Royal Bankshares were 15p higher on Friday to stan dat 519-1/2p.