Russian Fi nance Minister Alexander Livshit swarnedfinancially-trouble d Norilsk Nickel on Friday thatit must p ay overdue  taxes,but analysts said the firm wou ldnotbe liquidated or that its would assets w ould be  frozen.
"Norilsk  really isa big debtor, both to the federaland regionalbudgets, "  said Ko nstantin Chernyshev , equitiesanalyst at Moscow brokerage RinacoPlus and a Norilsk watcher. "Livshits's w ords arean attempt  to put pressure on t  he company."
The official Itar-Ta ss news agency quoted Livshits as telling parliamentarydeputies  thatR AO  Norilsky  Nikel 0#NKEL.RUO had to  pay itstaxarrears andthat bankr up tcy procedures applied to themetalsgroup.
"Ifit  was an unsolicited sta teme nt and a boltout oftheblue,then it obviouslymeans something,"  said Christoph er Granville, chief economist at United City Bank inMoscow.
"But if  it was a response to a deputy's question that was essentially loaded, then it was t he only answer he could ha ve given."
Russian tax and cabinet authorities, under pressure fromtheInternational MonetaryFundto boost  tax revenues as a condit ion forreceivingpayments of a $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow,  have beenstrikingfe ar into the hearts of  someofRussia'smost prominent industrial firmsby saying they must pay up orface liq uidation.
"They could fr eezemetal, but it's  not a long - term solution to the problem and wouldn't put money in thebudget," Chernyshev said. "I don'tthink theywould do that."
Entire  social infrastructures in the icy Far North whereNori lsk i s based depend on  thecompany, a nd Moscow has said it has  no finances to resettle hundreds of thousands of people -- an expenditure which could far outstripNorilsk's debts.
Nori lsk officials declined to comment.
Analysts saidth e government, w hileanxious about Norilsk's debts, is h ighly unlikely to bring the nickel, copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum groupmetalspr oducer to itsknees or t ake measures that  coulds ignificantly affect output.But it alsowants Norilsk,  the world's second-largestnickelproducer, toclean up its act.
"The procedure ofbankruptcy will be  applied," Ta ss quoted Livshitsastelling Duma deputiesabout Norilsk.
It indirectlyquote d  him as saying Norilsk should firstpay salary arrears, whic h in thepast have led to worker strikes.
"It is unlikelythat Norilsk will pay these debts in the near-term -- the company will remaina debtor inthe near future," Chernyshev said.
Heestimated the company's regional  debts atleastone trillion  roublesand said 30 per c ent of th e g iant Krasnoyarsk regional budget was fuelled by  Norilsk money.
Norilsk'snew majority shareholder, Russian commerica l ban kUneximbank ,hassaid it is reorganisin g met al exports through Interrosimpexin order to boost revenues.
But the changes haveyet toimprove significantly N orilsk's situation.
"Une ximbank has i nheri ted a mounta in and whether or not they climb out and over it rem ains to  be seen ," said one metals source.
N orilsk said in September that it total debts, includi ng unpaid salaries to worker s, were  13trillio n roubles. The company said last monththat it hadworked out a tax payment schedule with authorities, a fter regional tax officials threatened to seize some nickel  and copper assets.