Br itain's Serio u s FraudOfficehasyet to contact London-based s ecurities houses after a request for helpwitha French pro b einto Eur otunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sourcessaid o n Mond ay.
TheSFO saidon Sundayit hadbeenask ed  to len d a  handin an investigation by the F rench  autho ritiesinto alleged marketmanipulation of the debt-ladenc hannel tunnel oper ator'sshares.The SFO said it wou ld helpin the Frenchprobe although it hadnogrounds t  o launch  an investigationo f itsown into  the dealings which form the basisof the latest Paris investigation.
Securitie s firmscont acted by Reu ters on Mondays aid they had r eceived no approa ch from the SFOand did not expect to do so.They all said they would co-operate fully if theywere approached.
The investigation is anoth er chapter in a troubl ed corporate  story litteredwith incidents,w  hich earlier thisyear saw two firms -- SalomonBrothers and Swiss Bank Corp(SBC) -- c lear ed of insider trading .
Thetwo had been among un  derwriters ofa  Eurotunnel rights issue  in 1994 and, although nevernamedby Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Ope rat ionsde  Bourse (COB), said that they wereunder investigati on  in Julylast ye ar.The under writing group  alsoinclu ded Ba nque Indo suez,Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank  AG, Societe deBanque, Banque Nationale de Paris,  Banq ueParibas,  Caisse des Depots, CrditAgricole, Credit Lyonnais,Rober t Fleming,S.G. Warburg (now part ofSBC)and Belgianutility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are h eld i n F rance and, as a generalrule, more tra ding  in the s har es goes on  in Paris than in  London.
The SFO's  usual practise is t o issue notices which requirea personor  institution tobe inte rviewed orhand overdocuments, alth ough it canal so apply f ora search warr antif it wants to s urprise its target.
On Monday,itremained unclear what periodis currentlyunderinvestiga tion .
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the  rights issue, though it couldbe r evisiting this highly volatile time.
There havebeenpersistent suggestionsthat some operatorswere short-selling at around thetime o f the rightsissue-- forcingthe  prices downbyselling shares they d onot o wn in the hope of bu ying them back more cheaplylater.
Eurotunnel hascalledon stoc k  exchange authorities on both sides of the Channelto investigat e volatile  dealings at various times over the years.
Another example wasin Agust 1995, when a rogue report that thecompany  had signed adebt rescheduling agreem ent sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo -French t unnel  operator at t hat timedenied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an i nquiry  into the tradingactivit y anderroneous reports surrounding its sharesand theincident mightwell be the foc us of t he French probe.