From ancien t ages,humans  have used symbols andmyths to expres sthe irexperience ofa  reality thattranscend s th  e physical worldand  transmits it to futuregeneratio ns. Nowadays,  famous  brands apply mythologyto successf ul products due t o the ir ma gicalpower. The  logo of the hous e of Versace is a veryextravagantandextraordinary mark; itwas designedin 1978 by Gian ni Versace. Thelog o represents  the headofthe ancientGr eekmythology of Medusa Gorgon. The  designer exp lainedwhy he chose this character; it is a synthesis of beautyand simpl icity, whichis able to mesmerize anyon  e, j ustlike the clothes produced b y the bra nd. Other examplesare Lamborg hini;first, the Italian company wasengagedin the production of tractors. The  bull became the emblem of  thebrand, as thebullis t he sacred animal ofZeus.According to so mepeople, this anima l is extremely hardyand  strong, whic h endows the  brand with great power. Now, Lamborghini cars are high-performance,  ex pensivesupercar s,andthe emblemof the golden bullis very appropriatefor  them.
I prefer the mythof Prometheus be cause evil never prevails,   and goodness a nd justice win. The mig hty titanPromethe us  stolethe sacre d firefrom Olympustoprovide it for humankind.He  made human ity  independent of  the gods. Prometheus tra ined people to write, count, craftsand introduced them to  metals. Before, people were   afraid of the elements of the sea, but nowthe titan taughtthem how to b uild ships;  h umansbecame proficient in  the art of  medicine (Travis, 2021).Prometheus wasdestroyingpeople’s faith in the deity, and for this, t he t hunderer Zeus decided topunishhim.Pro metheu swaschain edto a  rock,the sunburned himmercilessly, andthe rain was  poundinghim. Howev er,this was notthe end  of th e titan’storment; a  giant eagle saton Prometheus’schest every day and t ore his liver(Travis, 2021).  Heracles,the strongest me n,killed theeagle  that to rturedPrometheus,brokePrometheus ’ c hains, and thetitan was free.