Englishfootball champions M a nchester Uni ted extende d their outstanding recent stock market form on Monday as renewed bid speculation sent the share pricesoaring by o ver 10 percent forthe second st raight sessi on.The latest gains were by a weekendreportinthe Sunday  Express thatAmerican Mark McCormack's IMG marketing agencywas conside ringabi dfor United.
"We never makecomments on unsubstanti ated pressstories," sai d anofficial at IMG'sLondon office. Buthe s  aid that IMG, most activeinsports  such as tennis and golf,was interested in increasingitsinvolveme ntinfoot ball.Earlier thisyear IMG lost out to sportwear companyAdidasin a battle for control o f former French  football champions Olympique Marsei lle.The Express reportsaid that any credible bid forUnit  ed  wouldhave  to be pitched at around 650-700 pence per share,valuing theclub a taround 430 million pounds ($678  million).
United sh  ares rocketed again on Monday, rising 54. 5p to 568p, valuing th e clubataround 350 millio n pou nds.
The share pricehas virtually trebled since the start of t he  y e ar andadded almost25percent in the  lasttwosessions alone.
Thelatest winn ingru n wastriggered whenchi ef executiveMartin Ed wards saidla st week that Unite d'ss tatus asBritai n's most profitable soccer club made it a likelybid target.
Publishing group VCI is reported to h ave ma de a300 mill ionpound bid for United earlier this yea rwhich  was rejected.
Anal ystssay that United would be an attractive  target for mediacompanies, citing the U.S example of television mogul T ed  Turner who ownsthe Atl anta Brav es baseball team.
The potentialincome from pay-per-view televisiondeals isalsohelping to drive the shareprice and may makeUnited's main shareholders think twi ce a boutselling now.
"The directors own 22 percent of the club...They can sit back for fiveyears and en joy the  football and t hen enjoy t hebenefitswhen the reallybig money comes in frompay-per-view," said Vi nay Bedi of b rokerageWise Speke.
Pay-per-view is expected to be int roduced  byth e e nd of the century andco uld allow leading clubs suchas Unitedto earntensof millions of pounds annually fromtelevision.
Focus on such juicyfuture pi ckings also lifted shares in Tottenham Hotspur, the other Premie r League clubwith a fullLondonStock E xchange l isting. They added11p to461p.
United,who last seasonwon th e coveted Eng lishleague and F.A.Cup double,hadtelevisionincome of 5.7 million pounds in 1995-96 whenthe  club made a profit of 15.4mill ion before tax.