Czechpower producer CE Z a.s. on Friday saidits nine month  net  profit hi t8.4 billion crowns ($312.6 million), up from 7.4 billion for the same  period lastyear, according to interna tional accounti ng standards, after household electricity d emand surged.
CEZ's Director of Planning and Analysis section PetrVoboril told  a newsconference that hi gher depreciation write-offs due to the opening of new installations cut the company's tax obligati ons, and boosting its bottom line.
The company's grossprofit fort he  periodremained fla t at 13.1 billion.
Czechaccou nting put the firm's profit for the firstnine months at 7.04 billion, up from 6.7 billion last year.
CEZ said t he result   did not c hange thefirm's p rofit fo recast under Czech stan dards forthe whole year, which is 8.1 billion  crowns, equalto last year's.Afinancial statements h owed CEZ wro te  off 4.1 billion in thefirst nine months compared wit h 3.4 billion  in the s ame period of1995,and paid 4.7 billionin income tax after 5.7bi llionlastyear.
"Above all, lowering  of tax obligatio ns in connection with depriciation pol icy have influenced  this(profit) increase," Voboril said.
Hesaid that overall demandfor electricity rose by5.5 percent in the period, and isexpected toreach a record   hig h of 55.3terrawatth ours, 6.1 percent up year-on-year, for  thewhole 1996.
Household consumption drove thei ncrea se, rising 10.5percent, while large clients demandedalmosttwop ercent more power over the same  periodof the last year.Voboril said that a recent  ruling by the Fi nance Minstryon maximum prices CEZcan charge regional powerdistributors did not effect r esul ts thanksto the sales increase.
The minis try decid ed that the maximum average priceCEZca   n ch arge for supplie s this yea r is 1,035 crowns per megawatthour, up tw o crowns from the lastyearbut belowthe  firm's1,040crown expectationincludedin business  plan.
Voboril said that short-te rm indebtedness   ofCEZ increasedas well as finan cial expenditures due to unpaid  debts from some ofthe eightre gional distributors,which totalled 3.2billion crowns as ofSeptember 30.
CEZ and six  of the cou ntry'seightregional grid operatorshad  been locked in a price disput e with CEZ until the ministry r ulinglast month.CEZisalso considering aninternationalbond is sue next yea ras it needs financing but has already flo oded the  domest ic market with paper, Voboril  said.
Local analysts welcomed the results butsaid they did notexp ect themtohelp CEZ's share price much as the Prague Stock Exchange is plaguedby a lack ofconfidence.
"TheCEZresults are slightly better thanI expected. CEZisfundamentally undervalued but ge nereal market sentiment is notvery strong,"said Pet r Dousa of Zivnostenska Ban ka. "I don't expect the pricetogo up to 1,000 in the next few days."CEZ sharesclosed up 14 cro wnsonthe Prague Stock Exchangeon Fridaytoclose at 937 .  -- Prague Newsroom,42-2-2 423-0003