Mercury Finance Co islikely to spend a tense weekend withits banker s trying to work out arrangmentstosolve its liquity crisis,the failure ofwhich couldforce the companyt o file for bankrupctyprotection, analysts and attorney's said.The LakeForest, Illi noi s- based auto finance compan  y said Friday it could not raise newcommerc ial paper to repay matu ring debt and  could not pay $17mill i on in commercial paper due  Friday.Afinance  company like Mercury makesm oney onthe difference, or sp read, between what it paysto borrow moneyand the higher rates it chargesitscustomers. A finance  company withouta source of funds  is like a retailer without a sour ce of merchandise, analysts noted.
"I f you can't fund, you're out of business,"one equity analyst thatfollows the co mpany said, requesting anonymity.Some rating agencies, includin g Standard& Poor'sCorp, lowered  Mercury'scommercialpapertoa defa  ult ratingFriday.
"They're very close to some reorganization,bankruptc yfiling, probably a voluntary reorganizatio  n," said ThomasKmiotek, analyst at Duff  & Phelps Cred it Rating Co.
He and other analysts noted the company has  another $100 million in commerc ial paper dueThursday, February 6.
A Mercury   spoke sman did not return repeated calls s eeking co mment on the company's financing Frid a y afternoo n.
Aside from  the company's current inabilityto se ll debt, Mercury is also facinga host of shareho lder la wsu its,filed afterthe com pany said it had to r es tate  its net i ncome overthe past four years  by a  total of about $90million becauseof accounti ng irregularities.
Lawsu its do not  become a financial liability for the company unless there is a  judgment  in favor of the s hareholders. However, the company'sadmission of misstatements makesit easierfor the sharheolders to prove their case, leaving only the questions of who would have topay how much, one securitieslawyer said. 
"Securities laws are very, very simple,"said Ted Koenig, a partner wi th Chicago-basedlawfirm Holleb &Coff "If there is an o mmission o rmisstatemen t ofamaterial fa ct... there's liabiltiy."Also, the  company's market  capitalization plungedby about $2.2billionFriday,based on the 13pointfall of Mercury'ssharesand  the 172 millionshares the c ompany said it had outstanding late last year . Thatreduces  the equity cushion  the company has available to show its creditors, Koenig said.
But analysts also saidthe co mpany hadabout $1 billion in loans receivable on its  books at thee nd ofOctober, 1996--an assettoshowcreditors.
"Noone has questioned the validi ty  of the amount of r eceivables they have on their books or the  qu ality ofthosereceivabl es," Kmiotek  said.
Also, Mercury has generallybeenwell rega rded in   the sub-primecredit quality loan business,which   could helpit negotiate w ith its banksand continueas a goin g co ncern,  said analysts and lawyers familiar  with the company.
Mercury said in a statement it is in discussions with itslenders to s atisfy working capitalneeds, but that it couldnot predictthe outcome of thosediscussions.