The U.S. government's to p Asia official, Winston Lord, was tohold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijingona range of is suesincluding human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian andPacific Affairs, arrived onTuesda yfor the unan nounced visit and waskeeping a low profile whi le  in Beijing,a U.S.embassyofficial said.
However he was duetoholdtalks with Deputy Foreign Minister Li  u and a possible meeting withForeign Minister Qian  Qi c  hen was on the agenda before Lord left  on Th ursday for Japan, diplo mats said.
In Washington,State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lo r d  wasprep aring for a visit next mont h by Secretaryof State Wa rren Christopher, but officialssaid a wide range of other iss ues would almost certainly be rai sed.
"Humanr ights will c ome up," one diplomat said.Washing ton lastwe ek sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years ina labour camp, as well as apparent plans totry another pro-demo cracyactivist, Wang Dan, on t he capital charge of plotting to subvertthe gov ernment.
U .S.  officialssay relations with Chinahavegenerally improved in recent months,but  there have been frictions in the past two weeks overits treatment of dissidents andover f resh reports of Chinesenuclearsales to Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on thetable in ( Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all ifthatissue of the  allegedsale of items between China and P akistan came up," Burnssaid. 
Nevertheless, he said Washin gton continued to maintain that China had not violated past pledges  with the sa  le, whi chthe Washington Times sa id last week consisted of a special industrial  furnace and high-tech diagnosti c equipmen t. 
Burns alsosaid  human rights is sues were likely to  be rais ed.
Diplomatssaid Beij ingwould almost certainly be angered by reports  that Chinese dissident Wan g Xizh e had arrived in San Francisco forasylum in the United States.
A row over human rightsscarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China  on November  21-22 on a trip originally an nounced in July.
The visit wo uld mark  the highest pointin relations since ties plunged after Taiwan's Presiden t Lee Teng-hui paid aprivate visitto the United States inJune,1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are m ovingtowards a possible  exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could sparkU.S. anger  are the alleged nucle ar sales and China'shuman rights record, w hileB eijing blames Washington for holdingup its application for m embership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said  Lord had considered the possibilityof extending his trip be yond  So uth Kore a whenhe left Washington last week, but did not finally de cide to do so  until he wasalready in A s ia.
Lord came toChina af ter a visit toSouth  Korea to di scusstensions over the beaching ofa North Korean submarine o n the S outh Kore an coast last  month. 
"With more a ndm ore (listed)firms involving insuchtakeovers, regulationand supervision has become atoughtask,"said one ana lyst with China GuotaiSecurities.
"The centralgovernment should notwait until there are to o many  headaches before ta kingmeasures to sort things out,"  he said.
But the analy st saidthat despite theproblems, takeovers would be afocus of the stockmarketover the n ext few years because of restriction s in other areas, including a ban on mergers between lis ted firms and unlisted fir ms.
In the six-year history of modern China'sstockmarkets, there has been no case of atakeover of one listed firm by another.