"You really promise? Really *really* promise ?"
"Of coarse I prom i se! Look, I've got the fiver nowin my pocket ."
Henry fish es a crump led£5 not e out of his back pocket.In Bill's own hands the pigeon strugg les and squawks.
The group had seen the nest in the corner ofthe roofandimmediately their thoughts turned to throwingeggs at cars  and windows. How disappointed they were when, uponinspection, they found not eggs  but a full g rown pigeon sitting in the nest. Not tobe put off James turned to B ill and d  ared him tocatch  the bird.He accepted andslowly  creptcloser to the nest, pausing to wave away He nry whohad decided to try as well.After takinga moment tocol  lect himself heleaped forthe pigeon,not scared in the least of the 2 0 story dro p just inches away, there was no safety barrier. Sure enough he  caught the pigeon.But thencame the quest ion: *What do we do with it? * This time it was Henry who suppliedthe dare. 
"Tie yourstoneto it and I' ll give you a fiver."
Of coarse, they have  all been taught better than this. As young as they were they had al  l been told at one point oranother not todoanything so reckless with a stone.They were atall times to be kept hidden and safe. Nevertheless, Bill  waskeen to earn th e respect of his friends and, han ding the pigeon to Henry, went jogging downstairs tofe tch his stone.Henry' s stonew asn't actuallya rock, none of them were nowadays,that's just what people call them. H is was a ringbought especiall y for the purpo se.This was a popular approachto stones but realisticallythey could be anything, youcould bindyour soulto aballoon ifyou wanted.
PresentlyBill  re turned with his stone and after a few minutes hadit tied to  the birds leg.
"Now what?" He asks.
" Now..." saysHenry "Yo u needto get itback!" Heshoots a grin at James and releases the p igeon w ith a jump. I  t squ awks and  begins to fl  y towards the neighbouring apartme nt block. Billtakes his pr omised money  from the devious friend and starts running i n the opposite di rection, towar ds theedge of the roof.Henry an d Jamesaregiggling now,excited forwhats going to happen next.Without stopping Bill jumps and falls screaming to the hard concrete floor. Of coarset h e fallislethal. Fromt he top of the building the other two can faintlyhearthe soundof him landing. They're out right l aughingat thispoint, He nry is trying to use hisphone to geta video.
Reincarnati on  only takes a few seconds and  soo n  enough Bill is fallingagain, th is time watchi  ng the pigeoncarry on it'sflight, getting smaller and smalle runtil his life ends once again. Before it can land Bill appears once more infront  of it, this time reachingforthe rings stuck to its leg. This scares the bird anditturns from the tower blocks and heads away from the centre of town. It's flight takes itto are  as with  ever small er bu ildings anditshows no signof w a nting to lando r descend at all. Andasit goes itcarries  Bill away withit. He nry  and James stop laughing at th is point, considering if this is why they were told to be sensible with r eincarnation stone s.