The Poem of The Righteous Sufferer is a Mesopotamian poem about the unjustsuffering of a suffering man. The Poemis small, consisting  of nearly 500 lines, and written in Akkadian. Itis relevant to its timeof creation because, bythe 13th century B.C., people had already begun to understandthe needfor  moralfoundations. The storyis told in the firstperson, who honorshis gods, but suffers from many illnesses. The Poem isa kindof reflection of alienationfrom t he divine,drawi ng attention to injustice and the problem of morality. Inthis r egard, the Poem oftheRighteous Sufferer allows the historical communityto explore ancientMesopotamia’s cultur al values and social at titudes.First and foremost, the Poem is seenas o ne of the beginnings of the biblical narratives  of theOld Tes tament. The fallof man and his  repentance are essential elements ofthe Poem.In terms of its cultural contribution, it is cr ucial to understand the Babylonians’ view of the divine. Awareness becomes the compan ionof the Poem’s protagonist,and he real iz es that no t all the good that happens to hi m is g ood to God. His lamentations are seen as a prayer complaint againstthe injustice accompanying aman, no matter how much wealthhe p ossesses.
The source demonstrates how people’s consciousness and doubts about life’s value have beentransformed. This cultural heritage shows that a righteous lifestyle does not mean goodtreatment from the deities.Possible injustice significantly affects society, so the protago nist laments, “the persecutor per secutes me day inand day out,” without understanding what he deserves it for (Poem of the ri ghteous  sufferer). Even thehealingofhis troub les doesnot make him happy,  andhe thinks that “the graveis near, the shrou d is readyfor me” because he has already once confronted God’s will (Poem ofthe righteous sufferer). The culture of the timeforced the mantohope for the best, even though the deities did not explain their decisions. The social problems in thePoem are revea led as a setof attitudes f o llowedbythe protago nist. He considers “the joy ofthe  heart”the days of honoring God, glorifying the king, andstrivingfor the state’s prosperity (Poem  of th e righteous sufferer). Inhis figure, onecan discern the image of the manof  antiquity, who, through suffering, goes thro ugh the hard way of life. Thesufferer’sexperi ence,  adherence to tradition, and established social principles received moral merit. These merits  canbe seen as a justifiedhope,and withthis k now led ge, we can understand why biblical motifsoriginated in Babylon. The social reality was that divinegrace  could  be earnedonly by hopeand faith.
Based onthe source, on e can appreciate how the man  was tightly bound to society. Theprotagonist speculates aboutfateandits volatility, trying to understand whygooddeeds and praise of  Godhave not brought him grace. He w onders why just lawsand rewards donot accom  pany good people (Poem of th e righteous sufferer).Thus, the overall social mood of the Poemis restless and unknown: th e  rea sonswhy the gods send  misfortune to society remain unspecifiedand unknown.
The Poem of theRighteous Sufferer t hus reveals the  issues o f cultureand society thatexiste  din the middleof the second decade B.C.The  cultural precepts of society graduallychanged from  completetrustindeities to anun derstanding of the necessity ofmorality. Human consciousness atthat time was transformed, and hope for the be st was the compani on. Soc iety’s social attitudes are exp ressed through the maincharacter’s rituals: honoringGod and praisingthe king. The hope for the best    w as only fulfilled throughthe execution of these rituals.