Introduction
Lea dership is animp ortant conceptbecau se it affect s operations such as safety in a healthcare system. It can be defined asthe ability ofan indiv idual to inspire others to  attain set g oals (Keats, 2019). In additi on, leaders help ensure thatactivities run effectively during care. For instance, nurse leaders can handle workplace incivility and conflict among staff. Workplace incivility is among the challenges  that affect the provision of quality care to patients. However, safety is a situation where one is free from harm. Therefore, it enab les nurses to apply safety initiatives to achieve safety standards  requiredduring care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership playsan integ ral role in the performance of an organization. It  is defined as leading a group of peop le towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes among health professionals or between patientsand providers. They also as sist ineliminating ins tances of work place incivility such as bullying, biases, and other ne gative emotionalresponses (Keats, 2019) . In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire ap propriate communication skills. As a result, lead ersensure that an organization runs effectively. 
Appraisal of Leadership
Leadership appraisal is an evaluation that consists of capabilities and traits. Firstly, leaders should berole models oran example to their followers. The followers should l earn through them (Becker et al., 2019). For instance, leaders should effectively solve disputes professionally. Secondly, theyshould guide the followers on the right path,especially inteamwork. Thirdly, leaders  should communicate effec tively and makesure they listen and respond appropriately. Thus, ahigh score inthe evaluation is determined by the leadership c ap a bilities a leader displays.
Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because itaffects careoutcomes. By definition,  safetyis a state of bei ng free from any h arm or danger.It can be the safe ty of pat ients orhealthcare provid ers in asetting (Trinchero et al., 2019).It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, arefree from errors. Safety also assists in the  creation of a conducive working environment for  pro viders. Forinstanc e, working in a clean environment ensures thatnurses are free from harm that could be caused when theystay in un c lean surroundings. Thus, the ov erall outcome of safety in a he althcare setting isproviders delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal ofSafety
Safety appraisal involves aspec  tsused to evaluatesafety in a healthcare setting. Firstly, sa fety is characterizedby healthcare services such as diagnostic carebeingfree from mistakes. Secondly, healthcare settings should have minimal patient re admission due to treatment going wrong(Trinchero et al ., 2019). Thirdly, h ealthcare providers should also be fr ee from any danger and should access protective equipment andoperate in an environment free from stress. Finall y, safety rules are adhered to by both providersand patients.
Impacton the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and  safetyinfluencenurses’need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to  ensure that patients get quality care. Toachieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. They are also required to know whenand  where to ask  for opinions during care. Second, in safety,nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019).  Thi rd, they are supposed to use evidence to provide ca re topatients.Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in school and the resources available at the facility to ensure qu ality care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with otherhealthcare providers to make informed decisions dur ing care.
Emerging HealthInitiatives – Leadership
There are emerging healthinitiatives on the aspect of leadership. Firstly, there is a need to create a conducive working environment where nurses can work effectivel y and provide quality care. Secondly, adequatenurse staffing to eradicatestress levels that adversely impact care.Third, nurses should have conflictresolution s kills to address problems that arise in healthcare (Keats, 2019).Finally, nurses should be educat ed to help eradicate workplace in civility. For instance, they should understandthe effects of incivility on the performance of an organization.Nurses shouldknow the role of technology in providing quality healthcare to  patients by improving the efficiency of operations. Thus, the emerging initiatives that leaders  should considerare fostering an enabling environ ment toprovide qualityhealthcare  services to the people.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives asfar as safe ty in healthcare is concerned. The first initiati ve is to ensurethat nurses work in a safeenvironment and that patients are free from medical errors (Keats, 2019 ). Thesecond initiative is conducting rigorous training  on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses unders tand the practices that promote safety. Finally, t he third initiative is the creationof policies and safety standards to guideo perations within healthcare. Safety standards help indirecting and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Theref ore, safety willbe attained in healthcare if nurses  understand safe ty issues and appropriate safety sta ndards guiding operations.
Ways to AdvanceCommunication Related to Leadership and Safety
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To adva nce communication, there is a need to culti vatetrust between relevant stakeholdersin healthc are , such as nurse l eaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholdersare open  and transparent during communication.The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way  i s byconstantly training nurses to be effectivecommunicators. For instance, nurse s should havelistening skills because it is essent ial in providing qualitycare to p atients. Thus, effective co mmun ication can be attained wh en there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate toolsto support information sharing, andwhen providers areequipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
Leadership has a direct link to safety in the workplace. It playsan integral role in motivating followers toachieve the set objectives. For instance, a nurse lead er ensuresthat nurses are encouragedto achieve healthcare goals. Nurse leaders also help solve  i ssues such as c onflict and eliminate instances ofworkplace incivility like discrimination. On the other hand, safety is being free fromany harm. Therefore, it also plays an important role  in ensuring that health provider sand patients operate and stay  in asafe environment.