Financial ser vices and property group Liberty Internation al  Holdings on Th ursdayunveileda moveinto the British pensions market in ventures involving the  British TelecomPens ion Scheme and   pension fund management group  Hermes.
Liberty is e sta blishing itsown  p ens ionscompany, LibertyInternational Pensi o ns, whichwill targetboth the needsof money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BTPension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pa y five million pounds ( $7.8  million) for 10 percent of t he equity of Liberty InternationalPens ions, with th e rest held  by Liberty.Liberty and Hermes said ina jointstatement they  werealso setting up a new subsidiary called H ermes Liberty Inter nati onalP ensions to offer specialised investment services to the Britishpensions industry, withHe rmes  asfund manager.
BT PensionSchemeis giving the  He rmes Lib erty joint venture"critica l massfrom the ou tse t" with a 1.5billion pound transferofassets to thenewfunds,Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to takeadvantage of the  ch anges affectingthe UK pensions  ind ustry."  Hermes' experti se in  investmen tmanagementand track record would help it to provi d equality and competitively priced pension  services.
David  Fischel,Liberty's managingdirector, said L iberty Internatio nal Pensions still required approval of Brit ain'sDepartment of Trade andIndustry but was otherwiseready forlaunch.
Hermes  called the joint pensions vent urea meeting ofminds.
"Liberty has the ability and techn ique s of selling pensions, it alsohasthesystems...and theadministration. We on the other ha ndare  good at ou r   particular core areas of investment management...we think that's av erygoodmarriage,"Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executiveof Hermes,said.
Ross Goobey  said Hermes h adapproached Lib erty International  onlyto find the grouphad been  considering an approach to Hermes.
"I t really was a meeting of minds onthis. Whether it develops  further from this weshalls ee.I think one stepat a time is quite enough for us ."
He saidthe venture would probably not beup and runnin g until the firstquarter of nextyear as regulatory approval f irst hadtobeobtained for th e new  group.
Thedecision by the  giantBritish Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer assets to th e new Her mesLibertyInternati onal Pe nsions funds would give the new venturea bo ost.
"Iwould hop eit gives some people some feeling of security thatB T Pension Scheme, which is after  all the biggest in the country, iswilling to do this," he said.
Libert y plans to sellpersonalp ensionsat its regionalshopping centres, which  are held through  a majority-owned sub sidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These h ave mo re than 150millioncustomer visits a year, Liberty said.