Bre-X  MineralsLtd. has been sil ent since it said last month that it formed a partnership with the son of  the Ind onesian ruler Suharto, a   move that h asworried sh areholders andprompted regulators  to seek more inform ation.
De spite  a whirl of rumours a nd persistent questions that have sent the Canadian mini ng company's shares on a roller-coaste r ride, Bre- X h as mai nt ained adogg ed silence. 
The Calgary-based company thatcontrols one of the world's biggest goldprospects in Indonesia hasnot talked to the press for weeks. Companyofficials will take callsonly from a handful of favoured analysts, according to  market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said go ld analyst Rick Co hen with GoepelSh ields in Vancou ver. "Ther e seemsto bea certain number of people they talk to.Everybody's a bit in the dark."
Bre-Xon Oct. 28 anno unced  its alliance with  Suharto's son, SigitHarjojudanto, whose busi nessi nfluence ispervasive in Indones ia.
Sincethen, instead of directly addres sing questions about itsbusiness in Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with the stockprice -- Bre-X hasopted instead to leakto the market caref ully selected press material.
On Sunday,for example, the  company faxed themedia, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story fromtheFar Eastern Economic Reviewdetailing its  links with  Sigit.
The article r eferred to Sigit's possible ties w ith the Indonesian  army, sta ted that one of Bre-X's Indo nesianpartners has beenbough t out andasserted that gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. tried to pushBre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions aboutthe article, Bre-X refused to respond and still  has not said whether it endorses the story orputs anyfaith in the statements.
"I'vecertainly s uggested a few times that t hey talktothemedia and clear  things up," saidN eilWinchester,ma nagerof su rveill ance for the Toronto Stock Exchange. "It would be advantageous to the marketplace."Rumours have sh rouded Bre-X since the Indo nesian government said last month it would not issue essenti alcontracts for work on the project until Bre-X cleare dup an  ownership dispute wit h some ofits Indonesian partners.
The dispute has put  a cloud over Bre-X's searchto find amajo rminingpart ner to help it developth e rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliancewithSuharto's so n was expected to help the company clear upits problems.
"They'reoptimist ic t hat theycan get everything within a coupleof weeks," said gold an alyst Michael Fowl er of Levesq ue Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he sai d Bre-X would notcommenton the article it distributed. "They justsent it out for general interestpurpose s."
Stil l, statements  in the articleand ot her gossip were taking its toll on shares linked to Bre-X and other exp loration companies in Asia have complai ne d the uncertaint yhas hurt theirstocks. 
Minorca Resources Inc., a Canadian miningcompanythat  has an interest in the Busan g deposit thro ugh an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo KaryaMineral,hasfound itself on the defensive. Talkabout Askatindo being bought out  is unfounded, Min orca President Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," hesaid.
Minorca's chairman isin Indonesia this week meetingwith Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions, Horst said.Horst sa id hehadaslew of una nsweredquestionsabout Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's sontoo.  "To be frank, the relationsh ip between Minorca and Bre-X is relativelycool."