I sat a t my desk, racking  my brain to  find who could havepos sibly discovered the truth behindthedeath ofPhill ip Mercer, the heir to one of themost powerful petroleum companies in the world. The job was done without a  scrapof evidence, Imade sure ofthat much.It  simplymade no sense, everyliving soul thatknew I k i lled Mercer were the very ones that orche stratedit. I may not know who this mysterious person is but I do know th at I wi llanswertheir qu estion with a bullet to the brain .
It wasnearly 3 :00 AM when I hear d muffled footsteps down the hallway. I reached for the silenced 9MM pistolin my bag, aim ing for the only entrance tomy corner office. The doorknob began to turnas I steadied my aim. Sweatwas trickling down my spine, my heart pounding as ifI were about to come face to face with the devil himself. The second it tookfor thedoor to open felt like aneternity,but I would haveratherendu red that second ofagonizing torment for therestof my life thento meet t he eyes of Phillip Mercerwhen thedoor opened.
His face was covered inscar tissue, leaving it almostunr ecognizable. It w as the eyes thatwere the giveaway. The look in his eyes wa s the same as  the night I thought I killed him. There was a look ofsuperi ority in them, as if tolet me know I would never  be capable of su rpassing him in any way. "There is no way, yousho u ld be dead!" were the only words Iwas capa ble of mustering."For allinten siv epurposes I still am, thanksto you" he replied w ith an  odd sense of calm in his voice." Will you at leastgive me the courtesy of ananswer nowthat I amhere?God knows I have been to the depths of hell and back in thes e last5 years so surely you can  give me that. I will answer any questions youhave  after." 
I recounted the entire t alethat crossed our twopaths on that fateful night 5 years ag o. I told him how I wasapproached by a man that worked for Prism In ternational, the most powerful energy corporation in the world. Prism stoodto gain billionsfromthe collapseof Mercer  Petroleum, gi ving  theman even tig hter stranglehold on the energymarket. The terms were simpleenough,kill PhillipMercer orhaveeveryoneIlove s ystematically killed. The choice was made for m e. Mymilitarybackground coupled with the fact I helped my step-father desig n  the Mercer home made me theobvious choice for the job no do ubt.From the re I told him how I was able tobypass the security o f his mansion be cause  I helped design it."What it bo ils down too is yourlife meant less to me  then those of m y loved ones . The p art I d on't und erstandthough is how yourstill alive! I shotyou in the  head, then as you collapsed you knocked ov er  a  cand le, starting afire that destroyed your home."
"I survived by nothing more then luck. Your bullet went through t he side of my jaw, lodgingitse lfinthe cheek region ofmy skull.  The heat of the firebrought mesu rging back to consciousness allowing me to escape but not without being badly burned.  The thought of  revenge ha sbeen the only force driv ing me to stay alive. I have  feared that you might have been me r ely apawn  being controlled by Prism so that they could buy up my fathers company. But dammit wou ldhave been so much easier to enact my revenge if it had simply been you though. Butn ow thatI kn ow  my worstfear s have been realized I at leas t kno w wh at I am up against."
"You can't possibly think yo u could take down Pr ism singlehanded!"
"I won't have to do  it alone because your going to help me."  He said withhis eyes glimmering  with moredet ermination thansuperiori ty. It wasthe kindo  f look that was impossible to refuse.