Outboard Ma rine Corpsaidit isonly five percent finished with a radical restructuring that it expects will result in morecharges against ea rnings in 1997 and possibly in 1998,the company said.
Restructuring is about "five percentco mpleteas far as going down theroa d and getting the savings,"said spoke smanStan Main. "That does not mean that we've takenonly five percent of our restructuringcharges ... There will lik ely be more charges during '97 and pe rha ps even into '98."
Sharesin Outboardon  Friday were off 1/4 to 15-3/4.  
Th eWaukegan,Ill.-based maker of boats and boat engines r eported  fourth-quarter p rofitsThursday that, excludingrestructuring charges, beat  Wall Street estimate s.
Analysts cautioned, how ever, that a turnaround at Outboard remainsa long-term project."They'regoingt obe continuing this restru cturing process in'97 and they're goingto continue to ha ve  some more charges ... Theydescribethe phase they'r e innow as the discovery process," saidLehman Brothers a nalyst Harriet Baldwin.
A  key  moment  could come Tuesday  when Outboard executives arescheduled to meet wit h analyst s and investors in New York.  
Expectedto be in attendance are the principalsof GreenwayPartners, an investment fi rm ledby former Carl Icahn associates Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein.Greenwaybought an 8.5-percen t stake in Outboard this  summer. Although the firmis known for acti vism,Greenway so far has  not pressure d Outboard toalter course, Mainsaid. Nor hastherebeenfurther communication between Green way and company executivess inc e  initial discussions in August, hesaid.
Analysts speculated therecould b e fireworks next  week or at the January 16 annual meeting  of shareholders, who ar esaid to beg rowing impatientfor acohesive recovery plan. 
Arestructuring was set in motion this year by chief executive Harry Bowman,  who came aboard in1995, whenthe stock was t rad ing in the low 20s. Bowmancontinues to deliberateover how t o fix Outboard andkey p ie ces r emainto be put in place, analysts sai d.The businessis under evaluation fro mtop tobottom, Main sa id.Oncerestructuring is com plete, Outboard "certainly will be a marine products company," hesaid.  
"Longerterm,  we c ould get intoproducts that would not be marinerelated. But our initial focus over the next  two to three years is to fix t he business thatwe're in and then perhaps look at other areasthat might be less cyclicalor seasonal," said Main, whois  director ofstrategic planning.
Bowman has spoken of  finding more stability for Outboar d, which suffers more from boating'sboom-bust  cycles thanrivals, such as Lake Forest, Ill.-based Brunswick Corp, whi ch has diver sified into bowling,fishing and camping gear.Outboard sees opportunities to enter other marke ts -- such as motorc yc les, snowmobiles and p ersonal watercraft -- via its innovativeFICHTfuel injection engine technology, Mainsaid.
Spending on capi tal and tooling in fiscal 1996, ended Sept ember 30, fellto$52.7 million from $66.5 millionthe year before , but spendingonFICHT is holdingsteady as the company converts more of its e ngineline to it, he said.
Sales of 150-hp FICHTengines todealers will begin in December and co nsumers will see the engines in January. A promotional roll-outis  underway.
The  company plans toconvert its entire outboard engine line above 20-hp t o FICHT engines, which will cost 22 to 25 percent more than  their traditional equivalents, Main said.