Most people du ring the Victorian era valued th e virtuesof society.Victorians believed that they werefixed andcertai n as guiding behavior to people allthe t ime. The virtues included morals that one can be judged according to his behavior. Any betrayal ofethical  standardswas termed lousy behavior and could deserve punishment. These beliefs have become misguided, undesirable, and inappropriate in modern America (Schlereth,  2018). They have shifted to values thatno longer haveclassical ideas of wisdom,justice, cou rage, or cleanliness (p. 691). They have becomesexual co nnotationwhere peoplepractice prostitution and other immoral behaviors.
In previous years, there were low ra tes o f crimes that have continued to rise.Victo rians practiced moral  principles in their lives, which  maintainedgood morals andbehavior. Cur rently, morals have ch angeda nd translated to destructive behavior sthat  co ntribute tohigher rates of  crimes (Schlereth, 2018) . Victorian speaks about morality and the best way s of devising it. In modern Amer ica, a characterhas beensubstituted, and most youths indulge in immoral beha vior.
In the Victorian era, women wereilliterate, immigrants were not socializing withothers, while now women are educated, and immigrants share  ideas  with natives. Men used to work for wages and get involved in politics whilewomenengaged in domestic work andchildrearing. In literature, eachera had a diffe rent theme accordingto the way we understand life (p.693). The V ictorian era focused on i  ndustrialization, imper ialism,domesticity, and cultural identity (Schl eret  h, 2018). Modern litera ture focused on the  theme of loss, despair, andpolitics.Victo rian era, most peo pl e were C hristian andvaluedreligion heavilycompared to the currentAmerica n.
The Victorian era and  modernAmerican have sim ilarities in how th e  people live in the two ag es. In the two generations, people practiced mo ral behavior cherishing virtues in society . The two value the social,economic, and political lif e,and the individuals participate in them(Schlereth, 2018). The eras impacted  the world ofliterat ure and changed people ’s l iveson how theyse e liter ature (p. 695). For example, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrotea poem,  ‘The cry of thechildren’, which has a message aboutindustrialization on child labor. The poem  narrates child labor which had become popular due to new machines and workplaces. Allpeople were able to socializeduring the  Vict orian era to learn formal and informal skills. Most people getinvolved in literature where they writepoems thatcould t alk o f th eir current situa tions and life experiences.
The Victo r ian and modern Amer ican eras have impacted changes to human lif e. Forexample, in England, the rate of indictable offences reducedby 50% and the popula tion grew from 19 million to 33 milli on, the  number of crimes reduced from92000 to 81000.The peopl e learned moral values andthe virtues thatcorrespond to better social, economic, and political life.  In thetwo eras, men and women understood their roles, learnedformal and informal skills, andcould interact and s o cialize.Peopl e developed mor als, and they were hardworkingand successful in business. The Victorian era brought change, innovation, and  in ve ntionthat contributed to current technological advancements.
The modern American misses alot from theVictorian era regarding morality, beliefs, and virtues. Duringthe Victorian era, people valued cultural opinions, cherished integrity in society, and practicedgood moral behavior. The  modern American had derailed  from all the norms and changedthe way of life. The re arepractices ofimmoral behavior su chas prost itution, many divorces, many crimes, and a lack ofse riousness in religiousbelief. M ost people have disrespectand ignorance of everyth ingint he current world. Victorian-erapeople were religious and  valued theirreligion, but a few currently do the same.
All people were able tosocial izedu ringtheVictorian era to learn their roles, get an education and interact with each oth er. Mo st people get involved in literature where they  write poems about their current si tuations and lifeexperiences. People could write poems sensitizing an iss ue affecting th esocietyfor the society to take necessary measures. In thetwo er as,people learned formal and informal skills,which helped them handle differentissuesin society.