Kellogg Co. on Friday reported adrop ofmore than 30 percent initsthirdquart er profits as its cereal volume dropped in an intensely competitive market.
Kellog g, which makes Corn Flakes, Frosted Flakes, Rice Krispies, Fruit Loops andSpecial-K,  is fighting back, laun chingmarketing plans for thefou rth q uarter that are aimed atboos ting its sales.
"We'llbe taking what  we believe are appropriate  actions," Kellogg  spokesman Richard Lovell sa id.
The company,the world's  biggest maker of ready-to -eat breakfast cereals, said its netinc ome for the third quarterfellto $159. 5 million ,including a$21.3 millio n charge, from $230 million a year ago. On a per share basis, Kellogg' s earnings dropped 2 9 percentto 75 cents,  withfewer shares outstanding,from$1.05 last year.Kellogg said it sovera llsales slip ped 9  percent to $1.68 b illion from $1.84 billion as continuedweakprices for breakfast cereals offset a 1 percent gain in worldwide salesvolume.
"As  previously forecast, ourthird quarterperformance was influe nced significantly by competitiv e conditi ons in the U.S.cere al category," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.Analysts estimate that Kellogg 's domestic cerealsales  volume fell 9 percent  to 10 percent  inthe thirdqua rter.
"Wecan't detail i t.It wasa challengingquarter in the U.S. and ourvolume was down,"  Lovell added.
Kellogg said itsfourt h quarter 1996 earni ngs l ikelywill show a slight rise from t he 77 cents i t earned a year ago.First quarter 1997 earnings, however, maynot mat chthe 99 cents earned in the 1996 period.
"It'sa challenging co mparison,"Lov ell s a id.
Kellogg's stockfell o n concern  over U.S. cereal sales volume  and the outlook for earn ings, dropping $1 at$64.50as hare, on the New York StockExchange. Earlier, it set a n ew 52-wee k lowof $64.125.Kellogg said theU.S. cerea l marketoverallwas sluggish, with sales growing about 1.5 percent, measuring grocerystor es, mass me rchandisers and all otheroutlets.
Looking  ahead,Kellogg refused to outline whatpromo tional programmes it was planning for the fourth quarter.Ana lysts said they didnot expect  the Battle Creek, Mich.-based cerealgiant to returnto deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.
"It's s ort of lefttospeculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg a nalyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There isno indication that , at thistime, they have shiftedfrom their long-term  strategicgoal,  which  is to reduceinefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Kellogg reduced prices on about two-thirds of its breakfast cereals in June. Other majormanuf acturers als o cutprices this yearastheybattled for mar ket share andtried to jump-start consu mer purchases.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-startconsumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz."Themessage there is that pric eshave to come down further," Rabinowitz said.According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal salesingrocery stores fell 1.6 percent to 2.6billion pounds for the52 weeks ended Aug. 11, accordingto the  most recent dataavailable, co mpare dwit h a year earlier.
Kellogg'ssales volume declined in that period by4.1 percent to  881.3 million pounds  for amarket sh areof about34. 4 perc ent, Information Resources said.