Learning history  helps people   draw connections between the past and present and allows makin g predictions for the future b ased on previous lessons. Climate changeis one ofthe most significanttopics of interest and rese a rch.  Nom atterhow well so cietiesdevel op in terms  of technology, they will inevi tabl y face disasters if theyneglectthe issues of nature.The Chornobyl  nuclear accident, which happened in 1986, was one of themost devastating  ecolog ical events that changedthe fatesof thousands of people in manycountries. My prior knowledge of the topic is not a mple, bu t I do know that  the major release ofradioactive materials occurred, which ledto the  contam inat ion of air andwater,causingnumerous diseases and deaths. I have alsoread somewherethat the then-ruling government of the USSR kept the explosion a secr et, which prevented peoplefrom saving their lives within thefirst few hours and days afterthe ac  cident.Unfortun ately, individuals livingnext to the nuclear plant, as well as those living farther, ha  d nochance of survival. The accident le d to the increase in radiation levelsto “between ten and one  hundred ti mes normal”(Price, 2021, para. 1). I haveal so read aboutthe courageousness and self-sacrificeof those who were involved in fire extinguishing  p rocesses.
I would lik e to learn m ore aboutthe reasonsthat ledto sucha disaster  and to find out whether itwas preventable. Also, I want to  investigate th e re asons behi nd  thedecision of the U SSR governme ntto conceal the tr uthand not let peo ple save their lives. I cannot unders ta nd how they could have been silentata time when th ousands of citi zens were being gradually driven into an ecological trap.
The valu es, assumptions, and beliefs I have related to the chosen topic are two-dimensional. On the onehand, Iam concerned that suchcatastrophes canoccur and  harm people’slives. On  the other hand, I am deeply disturbed by the fact that the authoritie s can act sothoughtlessly and dare to neglect people’s lives. I have alway s considered freedom andhealthasthe most important values. I believe thatworld lea ders should do everything possible to pr event such disasters or at least not conceal them.
My opinion about the topic is  thatpeople should learn from suchdisastersand usethis devastating lesson in the future. However, my perspectiveis very closely connecte d to the current world situation. The relevant events happening dueto Russia’s inva sion of Ukraine are alarming. In  theconte xt ofmy  topic,  I should note that a few days a go, Russians attacked Ukraine’s Zaporizh zhianuclear plant, which isthe largest in Europe (Borger &  Henley, 202 2). Whereas the very questionof the Russian invasion of Ukraine is  highly tragic and relevant, I will focus on the nucl ear plants’ seizure in this paper. Russians se ized Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhia nuclear plants,and  they seem notto realizewhat aftermathexplosions there c ould bring.
Sadly, it seem s that history hasnot taught some peopleanything. After so manydeathsin 1986and followingyea rs, one could t hink  that countries of the world had learnedthe value of people’s health an d lives. Thatis why I want to inves tigate thetopicof the C hornobyl nuclear accident. Thi s way, I will be abletolearn more aboutthat disast er and draw conclusions on the present-day threats and the need for pre ventive measu res to s topthe possibility of its repetition.