British NationalLottery operator Camelot  LOTT.C N on Tuesdayposted lower interimprofits asincome from  scratchcar dsales fellby over 450 millionpounds ($7 50  million).
Camelotchief execu tive TimHolleyalso told Reuters that the  plann  ed second weekly National Lottery draw would belau nched on February 5  and beheld every Wednesday thereafter. Camelot, which has faceda storm of criticismo verit s jackpot earnings since th e lottery was launche d two years ago, re ported pre-tax profits of 31.5 million pounds on salesof 2.1 billion pounds for  the 24 weeks to  Se ptember14.
This comp areswithpre-tax profit of 36. 2 m illion pounds and sales of2.51 billion pounds in  the same p eriod ayear ago.Camelot's five shareholdingcompani es --  CadburySchweppes,De LaRue, GTech UK, Rac al Electronics andICL shareda totaldividend pa yount  of 10 million pounds, upfrom 9.5 m illion.
Sa les for the week lyNational Lottery game rose two percen t to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds  of the adult p opulation regularly b uy tickets for theSaturdaydraw, a n event whichis televised  live an d has become a ritual for ma n  y Britons.
But sales of Camelot's"Instants" scratchcards  fellfrom 871 million p oundslastyearto 419 million this time.
Camelotexecutive s sai d that thedeclin e in sc ratchcard sales was to beexpected as the initial enthusiasm generated by thei r introduction  in March 1995waned.
"Mirroring the experience  of lotte ries worldwide,  sales of Instants havefallen since their launch and are now settledat around 17 millionpounds per week," Chai rman SirGeorgeRussell said in a statement.
Chief execut ive Holl ey said thatthe second weekly draw shouldboost sales of National Lo tte ry game tickets by 15- 20 percen t from their current weeklyaverage  of 69million.
Camelot saidthat over one billion pounds-- 50 percen tof turnover -- had been handedoutin prize money in thefirst half a nd t hat 567  million pounds  had  goneto "Good Causes" --  i ncluding charities andp rojects in  sportsand t he arts.
Camelot, which has been grante d aseven-year licence, sai d thato ver 40percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" andthe g  overnnment in duties,making it the world's m ost eff icient lottery operat or.
Profit a fter taxis just under one percent of total sales and Hol leydi smissed  criticisms  of Came lot's perfor mance .
"Ithink we have a slightproblem in thisc ountry with suc cess," he said,adding that foreign lottery companieswere bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed pla ns toset up The Camelot Foundation tosupport organisations helping the disadvantagedand di sabled.