Colombian  Anti-Drug Prosecutor Dismisses Moveto Lift Ban on Extradition as Virtually Meaningless
The Colombian government's recent move t o lift the ban onextrad itio n ofits citizensaccused ofdrug trafficking to the United States has been dismissed by the country's anti-drug prosecutor asvirtually  meaningless.
The ban on extraditionof its citizens   had been in place since 2012 when the governmentpassed a law prohibiting the extr adition of Co  lombian nationals accused of crimes co mmitte d  in thecountry to any other jurisdiction, includingthe Unit ed States. The move was seen asan attempt toprotect Colombian drug traffickers f rom extraditionto the US, which is among the major countries tha tdemand th e ex traditionof Colombian nationals.
However, theColombian government announcedlast month thatit haddecided to lift the ban on extradition of its c itizensrelated todrugtrafficking to theUS. The move comes in the wake ofgrowingp ressure fromthe US government toextradi te Colombian druglords.
W hile the Colombiangovernment  hailed the moveas amajor step in the fight against drug trafficking, thecountry'santi-drug  prosecutor, Claudia Car rasquilla, rejec ted it  as virtually meaningless.She said the move  would not change the situation onthe ground, as the ban hadalready been lifted in practice. She pointed o ut that Colombia hasbeen extradit ing its ci tizensaccused of drug trafficki ng to the United States  even when the ban was in place.
Carrasquilla said that since the ban wa s enacted in2012, Colombia has extraditedabout1,200 individua lsto the US, includin g several notoriousdrug lords, such as Juan Carlos Ramírez Abadía, alias "Chupeta," andDiego Montoya Sán chez, alias "DonDiego."She added that the Colombian governme nt had approved all these extraditions despitethe ba n.
Therefore, Carrasqui llaarguedthat the recent decision tolift theban was merely a "symbolic gestu re" aimed at pleasi ng the US govern ment, which  has been pushing for  moreextraditions. She warned that the move wouldnot help Colombia tackle  drug traff icking,which rema in s a major pr oblem inthe country.
Colombiais one of the world's largest producers of co caine, and drug trafficking has long been a serious problemint he country. Despite thegovernment's efforts to combat the trade, drug lords co ntinuetooperate acr oss the country,using viole nce and corruption to maintaintheir illegal operations.
The US government has been  a key ally of Co lombia in thefight against  drugtr afficking, providingf inancial and military support tothecountry's security forces. However, the US has also beencriticalof Colombia's handlingof drug lords, accusingthe countr yof beingtoo len ient on them.
The recent move to li ft theban on extradition of its  citizens related t o drug trafficking to the US is seen asanattempt by the Colombian governm enttoa ppease the US adm inistration, which has demanded that the country hand over several high-profile drug lords, includingDairo A nt onioÚsuga,  who headsColombia's most powerfuldrug cartel.
However, the anti-drug prosecutor's dismissalof the move as virtually  meaningless suggests that it may not havethe d esired impact. While t he Colombian  governmentmay have liftedth e ban, it remai ns to be seen if itwill actually start extraditing its citizens accusedof dru g trafficking to the USin sig nificant numbers. If it d oes not, the mov ewillbe little more than a symb olic gesture.