Colo mbia has long been a hubfor drug trafficking,but the country is taking s teps to crackdownonthe issu e by overturning  its extraditionban. The moveis facing backlash fromdrug traffickerswho a re seekin g to prevent the extradition oftheir associates.
The ban wasputin place in the199 0s as away to protect the country's sovereignty.However,it hassince beco me a roadblock in the fight against drug trafficking. Colombi  an authorities havefound  it difficultto prosecute dr ug tr affickerswho flee the country when they are underinvestiga t ion.
The  current administrationled by President Ivan Duq uehas been pushing for the ban tobe over turn ed. The country's top c ourt has nowapprovedthemove, allowing for  the extraditionof Colom bian nationals who are  wanted by for eign countries for drug trafficking.
Drug trafficking organi zations inthe countryhaveresponded with force.  Just this week, a car bomb exploded in the capital  of Bogota, killingseveral people and in juring dozens more. Theattack has been linked to a groupknown as the Nat io nalLiberatio n Army, whichis believedto have  ties todrug trafficking.
Colom  bia has lon g  struggledwithdrug trafficking, which has f ueled violence an d corruptioninthe country. Theg overnment  has made strides  in recent years tocombat the issue, but i t is an ongoing batt le.
The move to lift the extradition ban isseenasacrucial step in the fight against drug t rafficking. The government hopes it will encoura g e drug traffickersto think twicebefore engaging in illegal activ ities.
However, the moveis not withoutcontroversy. So me critics argue that it could lead t oa destabiliza tion ofthe country. T hey say that drug tra ffickers will seek revenge on those whocooperate with authoriti es,  and  that it couldlead toan escalation of violence.
Preside nt Duque has made it clea r that he is not backing down. He sees the move as a way to send a message to drug traffickerst hat their reignof  terror is over.
"Wewill notallowdrug traffickerstocontinue to operate with impunity in our country,"he saidina statem ent. "This isacritical step  in our fight against drug trafficking,and  we willdo whatever ittakes to bri ng those responsib le to justice."
The  movehas been lauded bymany in theinternational community, whosee  it  asabold step in thefight against drugtrafficking. The Un itedS tates has been a strong ally in this fight, providing funding and resources to help combatthe issue.
Colombia is making progress in  its fight against drugtrafficking, but itis clear thatthere is  still a long way to go. The government'sde cision to lift the extradition ban is apositive step, b ut it is also one that comes with risks. The cou ntry willneed to remainvigilant  as it  takeson this difficult t as k.