 IntroductionPeoples’beha viors anddecisions areoften the central scope  of sociological inquiry. Flint (Michigan) watercrisis can be seen as an illustrationof such decisions and behaviors that have led to severe issues with mult iple implications. To un derstand the causes of the crisis and ways to prevent such problems  in the fut ure, it is possible toemploy the Ma rxist approach. The class concept ofthis pa radigm b estfitsinto the  analysis of the situation asa conflict between two ma j or groups is apparent.
Flint (Michigan): Demographics
In themiddle of the twentiethcentury Flint (Michigan) w as a rapidly developing and prosper ous city tha t hostedsuch giants as General Motors. However, in the 1980s,  the town started to  degrade due to t he severe oil crisis that hit the automotive industry (Paul i, 2020). The city saw tremendous demographic shifts because thousandsof people left searching for  bette r employment and living conditions. At present, the city’s population is slightly over 96 thousand people  (Data USA, 2021). The  majority of residents are Black, and a third isWhite. The poverty rateis relatively high and reached 39% in 2020, while the median age is quite low (35,5 years). These figures suggest that the socio-economic situation in Flint is alarming, a ndsignificant changes are needed.
Water Crisis in Flint ( Michigan)
 The crisis start ed in  2014, and officials  in collaboration andsupervision of the public and scientists could not solve it until 2019. In 2014, offici als hadto change  the water source due to the difficulties withmaintainingthe existing infrastructure (Krings et al., 201 8). No rapidmeasures to improve the infrastructure were implemented. Thesame year, people addressed off icials  due to their dissatisfaction with water quality, which rema i ned unattained. After several studies and data publicatio ns regarding extreme violation of water quality standards (high lead level, harmful bacteria), theofficialswere forced to take a ction. As a result, pipes were replaced, and the neces sary improvement to the infrastructure was made with the help of the federal budget funds.
Water  Crisis inFlint (Michigan): Causes
One of the central issues that caused the crisis was the city’s constraints related to infrastructu re. Flint’s budget could hardly ensure proper maintenanceof pipes and other infrastructurecomponents (P auli, 2020). Due to the  economic situationin the city, the public had le sscontrol over the actions anddecisions of an emergenc y manager and Governor Rick Snyder.Residentsadd ressed the authorities, but their c laims received little attention as the authorities concentrated onthe economic development of  the city rather than public health or safety.
Flint Water Crisis:  Social Concept Applied
When addressingthe causes of thecrisis,  it is necessary to apply the concept of class.Although various scholars note that class is a subjective constructcreated for analytical purposes, this notion is a  relevant c omponent of population stratification (Neilson, 2017). People identify with a particular group, such as workers (proletariat) or big business owners(bourgeoisi e). In Flint, this stratification is relevant as there is almost no middle class. Apparently, officials conce n trated on the needs of big businesses rather than w orkers.
Marxist Theory: Class
According to the Marxist theory of cla ss, human society is mainly divided into theproletariat (laborers) and bourgeoisie (those who usurp laborers’ resources). The former are working  people with littleresources as they are taken over bythe rich (Neilson, 2017). These two groups are in constant conflict, and their resolution can b e achieved byrevolution. The revolution  can be implemented peacefullyin  terms of the coalition with a part (minority) of bourgeois and proletariat or due to violent struggle.  Marx believed in  the victoryof the proletariat and the establis hmentof communism with its  justice and proper  distributionof resources.Marxist Perspective  Regarding the Crisis
In  the s ituationin Flint, theofficials took the side of the b ourgeoisie, paying no attention to po tential outcomes.A uthorities made some decisions to allocate funds to boostthe development of the economy suppor tingbusiness. However, the proletariat was the class deprived ofhigher livingstand ards as poorpeople had to live in older communities with old water pipes contaminated co nsiderably. Water was the resource  that became central to the conflict between the two classes. Proletariat won the struggle, which could be explained by the success of the peaceful revolution with the coalition of workers and some par t of business owners.
Marxist Perspective Regarding the Crisis (So cial Concepts)
The discussion of the crisis from theMarxist theory of class perspectivemakes it possible to take a closer look at such concepts as civilsociety and race. Civil society is regarded as a construct bringing society to balanceand ensuring that all groups’ interests are addressed (Nei lson, 2017).Race is anothe r social concept thatcan be applied as most of t he city’s residents are Black. The poverty rate in this population is also the highest (Data USA , 2021). This group has the lowest acc ess to proper living conditions (good neighborhoods), employment, and hea lth care.  This is the most vulnerable group that was the primary force empowerin g the civil society,which led to considerable improvements and crisis resolution.
The Crisisfrom Bourdieu’sPerspective
The Flint water crisis can be viewed from Bourdieu’s perspective based  on the idea that classes are analyti cal constructs. Instead, different groups, with individualsjoining and leaving these clu sters, col laborat e or fi nd themselves in a conflict. There wasno  clear-cut working class in Flint, and the big business struggled for resources. However, workers,unemployed people, small business owners, big business owners, official s, scientists, and others werecommu nicating and collab orating. These interactions helped the groups solve an issue that had adverse effects on allof them.
Conclusion
M arxist and Bourdieu’s perspectives can  be both applied to analyze the Flint Water crisis. It becomes clear that classes are objective constructions, although they are notclear-cut. Workers,entrepreneurs, big business owners,merchants, scientists, and employees h a vediverse interests,  and theymay sometimes be in conflict. However, the needs of people pertaining to different groups can be achieved by collaborating. TheFlint  Water Crisis isan illustration of the  conflict and its resolution. Although the focus was initially on the interest ofbusinesses and   economic growth  at the expense of public health, people managed to force officials to make the right choices and address the water issue. The representative ofdifferent classes and cluster s of society formed the civil society that became the power bringing the s olution. The authorities had to implement appropriate measures to solve the problem.It is clear that civil society can be a supervisory force to ensure that officials make proper decisions.