The rock a n  dmusic popscene wereintroduced to and gained po pula rity  on telev ision throug h massive hit s howsfor teenagers. The thr eeprimary ones were Where theActi on Is on CBS ,Shinding on ABC, and Hullabalooon NBC. As more households hadaccessto tele visions along withthe growth  of widespread rangeof p rogramming,including musical  ones, the televisionplayedasig nificant role in d i stributing the musi ctothe public. Thebands that appeared on these hit TVshows went on tosee significant su ccess in the charts. Thet elevision shows helped to arti cu late the new sort of yout h music cultur e and almost became a star-making mechanism in arelationship and p rofi ts that the musicand television ind ustriess hared. So meba nds , such asthe Monkees, the American r esponse  tothe Beatles, were created withthe purpo se of television performanceas their acting and on-camer a comfortas a groupwereini tially  prioritized over music.However, theMonkees’ music too k  off as tro nomically beyond anyone’s ex p e ctati ons. Nevertheless, they w  ere a band groome d  by the  ent erta inment indus try with an emphasison t elevision performances which took awaymuch of the authenticity, even when compared to their counterparts The Beatles, who  although made visual content, f ocused on their own music strong ly(Covach a ndFlory 212).
Television drasticallywent onto change  the landscape of th e musicindustry. First , a split f ormed among artists   and fans,w ith one side  focusing onth e pop-oriented,pe rformance -focused televisionmusic , while  theother, typicallyolder audience wasdrawn to seriou s-minded music of rock  which  continued to be played on  the radio ratherthan TV. Television also broug h t aboutthe pheno menon of fictiousbands , such as the popularArchies, a cartoon drawn bandpopular with young teens (Cova  ch  and Flory 214). This has neverbeen done before  and similarly created a new genr e of music-television entertainment. Ho w ever, until the advent o f cable-network  oftelevision resu lting in dedicated ch annels such as MTV,the television phenomeno n in the1960shad itslimitations. Most T V sets atth e time had poor audio and visual quality, and asrecordingand radio sound quality improved with hi-firecordingand FM, the disparities were n oticeable. Televisionis notby nature of design a s ound medium, andth e musical experience  ismeant to be envelop ing   leadingto the splitin th e fanbase , where you ngeraudiences who generally  cared less abou t sound quality appreciated t hevisual medium to their music(Frith 279).