Apple Computer Inc., struggling to remain the teacher's pet among computermakers, is turning a modified  version of its hand held Newton organ izer into an inexpensive portable computer for students.
The  computer maker on Monday will unveil theApple eMate 300, an $800  machine thatlooks like a grown-up'slaptop with a  keyb oard and aflip-up screen, but in arugged casing tha t cansurviverough handling.Apple plansto sell the machinedirectly toelementary and high schools, b eginning early nextyear, as an alternative to personal comput ers.  For theprice ofa $2,500multimedia  PC, a school can buy threeeM ates, Apple executives said.
"The federal government says we need to get  to a three-to-one student-to-c omputer ratio by theyear 2000," said Jim Groff, general mana g er of Apple's information appliances gro up."I would say the eMate is the   only credibled ve hicle  for accomplishing that."
More vital to Apple, the product could keep educators  fromabandoning the companyas the leading supplier of computers for classrooms,analysts said.
"The potential  forsomething like this in aclassroom setting i s tremendous," said MikeMcGuire, a mobile computinganalystat Dataquest Inc. "This will be an indication to educators that Apple is oneof the few companies spending time extending computing to more andmore kids."
Apple needs a distinctive product to set itself apart from  other personal computer makers crowding into the educationmarket, analy sts said.
Although Apple, based in Cupertino, Ca lif.,still enjoys strong educational sales, sales of I BM-compatible personal computers by companies such as  Compaq Computer Corp. are growing much faster.Apple'scomputer has always been the favored tool  f or teaching child ren how to use computers. But in the face of Apple's uncertain future and aflood of cheap PCs, schools are lesslikely to remain loyal.
For the 1996-1997 school year  , of all th e computers that schools plan to buy, 56 percent will be Apple Macintoshs and 40 percent IBM-compatible machines,according to a recent report by Quality Education Data, aneducation market researcher. In the p revious school ye ar,the purchasing plans were 61 percent Macintosh and 38 percent PC.
"The numbersare overwhelming in favor of PCs," said Carole Cotton, president of CCA Consulting Inc.,another tracker of technology pu rchases by  schools."No school district can afford to make a mistake" whenpic king co mputers  they will use for years,she noted.
Apple's Groff said, however, that  the eMate is not the company'sanswer to competitors' inroads.
 Ins tead,  he said, the device was built for schools asking fora cheap, powerful computer that can offer educational software and Internet connections - - as well as endure rough handling by kid s. 
"When we introduced the New ton three years ago,  it was  a solutioni n search of an application,"Groff said. Education turned outto be one of the best applications, hesaid.Along with the eMate, Apple plans to unveil  a beefie r version of the Newton MessagePad  on  Monday. The new MessagePad 2000 features better Internet capabilit ies, easier connection to P Cs and built-in wo rd processi ng and spreadsheet software.Analysts said,  however, th at the eMa te is the more interesti ngdevice. Teachers and students will likeit  becaus e it is not as esotericand hard to run asa traditional personal  computer.
"Kidsarehaving  tolearn more about how to run a computer than about reading and wr iting, " McGuire s ai d. "Theability to have the kid justturn onthe device and getright into thewriting assigment   is reall yvaluable. "
TheeM ate weighs four poun ds (1.8 kg  ) and fits into a backp ack. It can run for a weekon rechargeable batterie s, accordin g to Apple.
The machine features a built-in word processor, drawin g and equation-drawing p rograms and an address book. With an optionalmodem an d software, students can browse the Internet.
Still, the  eMate could  bea tou gh sell for Apple.
Because its software is based on t he Newton  operating system, it cannot  run the thousands of educational programs writtenfor the Macinto sh and for PCs running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
Appl e executives are confident, however,that the eMate will help the  company plac e more its computers onstudents' desks.
"There's 52million screaming (grades) K-to-12 children to sell to," said Robert Kondrk,  Apple's manager o f education product lines. "We've known  for years this is an opp ortunity, but we  didn't have the technology todo it before. We do now."