Inf ertility is one of the most commo n problems these days, andit means that a person does no t have a chance to get pr eg nantfor severalhealth issues.  Many couples in the UnitedStates may face this problem, and  the causes can vary  fromcongenital diseases to acquired physicalor psychological trauma.This body condition doe s  not  always affect only females but alsomales can suffer fro mthis issue.Ge netics has  a strong influe nceon infertility, and it maybeconnected to people of all ages and nationali ties. Around 18% ofwomen inthe United Statesbetween the ageof 21  and52 stated that they had  faced infer tility in their lives (Ma ncuso et al., 2020). I believe  that  env ironmentplays a significant rolein this issu e. People should be morecaut ious about thei r health topredict health problems thatmay cause the inability to become pregnant or impre gnatea partner.
The causes ofinfertility arediverse and might notbe seen by non-professionals. For instance,age playsa significant role a  s theolder males and femal e s are, the more chances of receiving infertility. Moreover, hormones play an important role inpregnancy, and  whenany ty pe of disbalance appears  inthe human body, problemswithpre gnancymightar ise. Obesity or anorexia can alsoindicateinfertility a s the human body spends crucial resourceson other areas to support life without giving a chance for women tobecome pregnant. Som e physiological problemslike anomalies of the uterus orovaries may also become the main cause ofthe is sue.
 The percentageof male infertilityisnot high compar ed to theopposite gender. Nevertheless,7% of men  suffer from this problem, and the causes of these cases are differ ent (Krauszet al., 2022).Around 20% of those males who cannot impregnate their couples are suffering from genetic factors that were transferredthroughout generations. When malescheck t heir healthconditions anddiagnose infertility at earlystages, they have ach a nce to overcome t hisproblem and protect the abilityt o procreate. Low sperm produ ction may also happen dueto psychological factors like depression or a ny type of  disorder.
The percentageof females suffering from infe rtilityishigher, andi t is usually rela tedto diseasesthat cannot be treated. Whenwomen b ecome diagnosed w ith several health issueswhich do not allow them from becoming  pregnant, doctors rarely have a chance tore store theability to procreate (Barbieri, 2019).  Nevertheless, a female’smentality is under a lot of pressure due to sent imentality, whichis specific  to this ge nder,  andthi s factor may cause psychologicalproblemswhich cause infertility. Abortion might  also become the reas onfor the inability to become p regnant. While the procedure is at the late stages of pregnancy, doctors might not resto re the functions that allo w women to becomepregnant again .
Infertility remains the mai n problem that is notunde rfull control .In some cases, itmay bec o meimpossible togive ape rso n  a chanceto continue becoming pregnant or impregnate their partner. However,sometimes it is possible tosolve the problemby usin g medicines, surgical procedures, and Invitro fertilization(Repping, 2019). Moreover,  a psychotherapist can helpdeal with psychological problems that are barriers toconceiv i ng a child.Every case is unique, and o nlydoctors candecideif anytreatment would beuseful or n ot.