Canada's big six banks, which  have long ruled the country's stre et corners withtheir vast  branch networks, face a challenge to their dominanceby the In tern  et and t he  rise of new "virtual banks."Telephone and computer ban king, debit cards andautomated telle r m achines(ATMs) arerapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-morta r banking system.
Newtechnology haseliminatedthe need f or costly branch networks  and lured offshore rivals to jump into Canada' s $66.5 billion consumerbank ing market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to s end our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- much  loved, but seldom used," said  Bank  ofMontreal chairman Matthew Barrett in aspe echto Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS  PREPARE T O MEET THECHALLENGE
The bigbanks, which dominate regular banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal  Bank of Canada, Canadian  Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Mont real, BankofNova Scotia,Toronto-Dominion Bankand National Bank of Canada  are spending millions of dollars to developnew distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion in assets, isby far thebiggest electronic challenger. The Dutchfinancial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institu tion with assets of $147 billion.
ING,already a player inCanada's insurance market, plans to  off er a wide r ange of electronic bankingservices througha new subsidiary, ING TrustCo. of Canada, basedin Toronto.
ING  iskeeping a low profile until its application for a tru st lic ence is approved,but bank officials are confident of success where others have failed. 
In recent years, several foreign banks abandoned Canada because of its restrictive bankingl aws and stiffer than expected compet ition from the big domestic ban ks.
"Itwould be fair tosay that we will be competing on several fronts. It won't be hard tooffer betterservice," said Jim Kelly, vice-president  of marketing for ING's Canadian operations.
INGWILL DRAWON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its exten sive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts hav e said ING can use  Canada to fine tune itsv irtual bank before offering similar services in the larger U.S. ma rket. But Kelly said there a re noplan s yet to t akeING's virtual bank south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going  to the U.S. would bewrong. To saythat we would look at it and see if there is a marketopportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeingCa nada's  consumer bankingmarketis Citibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which isjoining with Canadian fund manager AGF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second foray intoCanadian consumer banking after abandoning a bid to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuar t, cou ntry managerof Citibank's consumer banking operatio ns in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's cu s tomer base. Citibank plans to offer  customers a full-service banking package, includingcredit c ards, access to ATM service and telephone banking.
"We're not locked into the costs of ab ricks-and-mortar structure. So we ca n serve them throughtechnology and thatenables us to p rice ourselves very competitively," hes aid.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern forother foreign banks seeking t oenter Canada with an establis hed customer base, Stuart sai d.
BIG BANKSUNDERPRESSURE FROMLOCAL RIVALS
The Big  Six banks are pressured by local rivals aswell.
Lastmonth, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union, the country's biggest credit union with $3.6billion in assets, applied toopen a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competit ors are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks are also on the move.
The  banks spent a record $1.7billion on new tech nology in 1995 and that is expected to reach$1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst & Young.
Much of the money is  being poured into alt ernative delivery channels suchas point-of-sale creditand debit cards, ATMs, telep hone a nd computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all paymenttransactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.
 Telephone and computer tran sacti ons  are climbing as well. Traditional bank transactions are see n fallingto 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last year.
Among Canadian ban ks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephon e banking with more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percentoftheir eight million customers to be using alternative channels in five years. 
L ast month, Royal Bankjoined 14 other North American banks to se t up ac omputerbanking network withcomputer  giant IBM  in early 1997. All the banks ar e struggling todecide the  futu re of their branchnetworks,but CIBC has taken the first steps to overhaul its 1,400branches.
In a recentpilot project, CIBC employed  greete rs to guide customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customers onsuch products as mutual funds, loansand mortgages.
Billing it as thebank branch of  the fut ure, CIBC said transactioncosts  had fallen dramatic ally, whilecustomer lineups were much thinner.
But by usingthe selow-cost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many consumers comp lain are too high, Ernst & Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken th e acquisitionroute to boost its Intern et services. It recently bought a 10 percent stake in iSTARInternet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, tohelp develop new channe ls and services for the bank.