Two yearsago,China's second telephone network  set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunicat ions (MPT) and bring competition  into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has fo und it hard to tackle a seasoned competito r -- one that is a lso the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be thereferee orone of the at hletes onthe playing field?" asks Li Huifen, pres ident of China United Telecommunications Corp, also  known as Unic  om.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPTmonopoly was initially hailed as a boost  for China's long-suffering telephonesubscribers, who  o ften had to  wait up to ayear for a teleph oneli ne andendure indiffe rentservice a ft e rwards.
But Unicomhas captured o nly a tiny sl ice of the market as its entrenched competitor ha skept a tight  grip  on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clou t to slow the upstart network'sadvance.
"Theyha ve delayedinterconnections and won't give us t elephone num bers for our customers," Li said in an interview."Weneeda telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but  the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics  industry (MEI), powerand railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI  has manufacturing muscle with acorps of factories producing telecommunica tions equipment. But it feared the MPT'sequipmen t-making capacitywouldeventually squeeze it out ofthe marketun les s  it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the M PT's public  network was heavily o vercrowded.
Thefeud between therival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes en snaring  foreign companies. Firms thatdid business with  the new network were threatened withblacklisting by the  MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have easedsomewha t in  recent months, but it stilltookan orderfrom the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expec ts   to have more  than 60 milli on telephone lines installed by  the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in1996 alone. The total is likely  to top 100 million by the turn of the centu ry, still onlya small segment of the na tion 's 1.2 billion peop le.
MPT  says it should not be   considered a competitor toUnicombecause it has a separa te oper ating arm called China Telecom.
"Since1993, we have separated policy makingfrom business operations by creating ChinaTelecom," said an MPT spokesman."The MPT is not both regulating an d competing," he said, blaming Unicom'sslow pr o gress onits own technical problems.
STRUGGLETO BE  IMPARTIALBut China T elecom officials concede itishard to saywhere one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they candraw  the line cleanly, the MPT must struggleto remain impartial.
"They always say  they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "Bu t China Telecom is their own child, and parents  are always partial to their ow n children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in  August, be coming the third president in the company's brief history.Shewas tapped from her job as deputy mayor of the big indust rial cityof Tianjintoput political clout behind the second network.
The company started withmobile telephone services, fi rst in the big cities ofBeij ing, Shang h ai, T ianjin and Guangzhou, andeventuallyexpanded to 16 cities. It has made itsgreatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers,Li said.
"In 10 years w e will have 10 percent o f the fixed linemarket and 30 percent ofthe mobile phone market," Li said.
One cl ear success has been in  bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000to 20,000 y uan be fore Unicom came a long.
Li says Unicom is profitableon  its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite thecost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage . Foreigners  are not per mitted to operate telecomm unications  networks in China, and many fore ign firms  give Unicom capital in return for a share ofthe income.
That will at least eas e the growingpains forthe infant network, analysts said.