Canada's sixbiggestbanks are poisedfora further round of buoyant profitswhen theybeginreporting third -quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third consecutive record  year, analy stssaid.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investment banking and dealing revenuesan d better loan qualityare expectedto drive profits in the third quarter endedJuly 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six areexpected to be15 percent to 20 percent higher than the thirdquarter of las t year, analysts said.
"I woul d expe ct  more  sectors of the banks tobe more profitable than they werein the corresponding quarter of  lastyear," said RoyPalmer, an analyst with  TD Securities.
Ba nk of Montrealand Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third- and  f ourth-largest banks, respectively,kick off the e arnings  parade  on Tuesday.
Canada' sfifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion  Bank, and  the  smallest, National Bank of Canada, report onThursday.
The country 'stop two bank s, RoyalBank of Canada and Canadian ImperialBank of Commerce, are  scheduled to deliver  their results Sept . 5.
Despite a recentdownturn infinancial markets, analysts saidsecuritiesearnings should be stronger  th an last year. Canada's brokerage  industryis dominated by subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
The banksarealso expecte d to benefit from l ower loan losses as the industry continues to r ebound from disastrous loans incommercial real  estate, which collapsed in thelate 1980's.Desp ite the correction in  stocks earli er this su mmer, ba nk stockshaveremained strong  performers. Lower Canadian interest ra tes  have helpedpush bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Sto ck Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of stro ng profitability coupl es up withlower inte rest rates,thenit probably will setthebackdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, ananalyst withDeacon CapitalCorp.
Analysts said they do not expect any of the banksto  raisetheir dividends durin g  the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits areexpected to  yield dividend hikes atthe end ofthe fiscalyear.
The big banks areon trackfor a third str aightyearof record annua l profits. The group rang up a combined profit of C$5.17 billion in fiscal1995 ended Oct. 31, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmersaid he expects  a modest increase in profi ts.
"Investment b anking isa cyclical business. It may tail off abit, but there isno sign ofa recessionyet, so Iwould think we could get modestlyhigh er earningsnext year," he said.
B ankof Montreal is expectedto r eporta third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share,up from 93 centsCanadian(67.9cents) per sharea year  ago, according to figures suppliedby the International Brokers Estimates  Servi c e.
 Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cen ts) per share in the third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadia n (62.8 cents)ashare.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 cents Canadian (52.5 cents) pershare profit, up slightly from 71 cents Canadian(51   .8 cents) per share in the third quar ter of 1995.
National Bank'sthird quarter earnings are forecast to rise to 41 cents Canad ian (29 .9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1cents) Canadian  a sharea year earlier.
CIBC's third qua rter results are pegg ed at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share comparedto lastyear 's C$1.13 ($82 cents)per share.Royal Bank of Canadais seenimproving to 96centsCanadian (70 cen ts)a share in the t hirdquarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per shareayear  earlier.