SierraSemicondu ctor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursd ay on expectationsthec ompanywillemerge as  a smaller bu tmore profitab le operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The  San Jose, Calif.-based  company'sstock  gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pullo ut ofthe highly competitivemodem-chipbusiness and focusinste ad on the fast-growin g market for computer networking equipment.
The stockrose $2.625 to $11.87 5 in late tra ding onNASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, but itwill   be a mor e profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Roberts on Stephens & Co.
Butanalysts noted that Sierra still h as much painful  workah ead of it, includ ing cutting as many as150 job  s from its work for ce,  whi ch currently has 500 peo ple, and building up the businessof  its PMC-Sie rra unit, whi ch ma kes rou tingdevices and chipsetsfor high-speed computer networks.Thecompany has announcedplans to take a charge againstear nings of$50 million to $80 millionto write down th e value of assets andinve ntories an d coverseverance payments.
Scott Randall of Soun dview Finan cial Grou p said the companylikely wouldhave diffic ult y selling  itsmodem-chipbusi ness.
"Once you announce yourintention toexita bu siness, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he sa id .He said that   w hile t he  company is focus ing on the fas test-growing part of its busin ess, themarketfor networking chips has begun to  attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Busines s Machines Corp
"As the market develops the questionis, are they able to make that transition tobe a m  uch largercompany?" Ra ndall said.
Other analystswere more  bullish, even though the company is expected toshrink to slight ly mo re than half it scurrent sizein sales.
"It'sapositive strategic move ," said MilesKanof Hambre cht & Quist."Themodem business is alow-margi n,commodi ty business,"he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated$33 million of the company's $117 mil lioni n salesin thefi rsthalfof theyear, comp ared with $45 million in salesofmodem chips, Kan said.  But the  P MC  unitis far more profitable,he said.
Sierra's stock has fa llen froma highofnearly $25  th is yearast he comput er chip secto r hasbeenbattered by falling prices  and concern about slowing demand.