Microsoft  Corp. reportedbetter-than-expecte dprofits for the latestquarterMonday as strong demand fo ritsWindows  9  5 and Wi n dowsNT computer operating s ystems helped fuel record sales.
The world's largest software maker s aid earnings rose  23 percent to a record$614million, or  95 cen ts a share, in its fisca lfirst quarter ended i n September, from $499 million, or 78 cents a share,in the 1995 qua  rter. Revenues jumped  14 percent to$2.30 bil lion from $2.02billion.The profits exceededWall Street'sexpectation s of 90 cents a share, and shares ofthe softwaregia nt rose to $1 36.375 i n after-hou rs trading from the earlier closeof $134 on Nasdaq.
Microsof t cited strong acceptance of the  company's high end Windows NT oper ating system.
"We  shippedversio n 4.0 ofWindowsNTthisquarter, and themomentum behind  the p roduct isoutst anding," said Jef f Raikes, Group  V ic e President, Sales and Marketing."Corporate customers made  the decision toadopt Win dows NT servers and workstations i n record numbers, d riving 19percent revenue  growthover last qua rter in the U.S. and Can ada. Sa lesof Windows  NT serv er grew at nearl ydouble therate of other operatin g systemen vironments."
Microso ft's result s  were considered acruc ial measureo  fi ts progres ssincethe year-ago period included the launch of the company's much-hyped Windows 9 5 operating system.Industry analysts have said Microsof  t' s sales and earnings growthwould slow from last year's blistering pac eofm orethan 46 percent  butnoted it should continue to benefit from higher sales of personal computersand the growinguse of Windows 95 andWindows NT.Microsoft Chief Financial Officer MikeBrown said he e xp ected revenues torisesequen tially over the next two quarters fr om  the $2.3 bi llion reportedfor the quar ter ended  on Sept. 30. 
In an interview, Brown also said he thought the company 's costof goods soldco ulddecline "alittle bit" in th e long term from  the  10.9 percent of revenues justreported, al ready down from16 percenta year ago.
" We'llgrowa little bit in December and then alittlebit more inMarch, Ithink , " Brownsaid. "I'mvery happ y wi th  the general revenue trend, a nd Iwas  very please d with the pattern of costs  in the quar ter."
Brown said revenues in the December quarter wo uld be drivenin part by holiday season sales,while the next quarter wouldgeta boost from the release of the company 's Office 97 businessapplica tions upgrade to one of its coreproducts.