8% of the residents of progressive countries have chronic pain, which is considered to be an extreme issue.
There is currently a severe lack of information about the effects of opiates. They manage pain successfully, but the past few decades indicated the growing concern regarding opiate abuse in forms of overdose and addiction. A more manageable and safer alternative might be medical marijuana. However, the legal status and novelty of this drug do not allow finding a large number of studies on its effectiveness. Specifically, it concerns the emotional condition of patients experiencing chronic pain. This research paper aims to analyze levels of depression and anxiety among people receiving therapy by comparing the effects of pharmaceutical opioids and MM.
The study was conducted in the form of collection and analysis of statistical data. Participants were recruited for six months at two major pain relief centers in Israel. The researchers used The Depression Module of the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale to interview participants, evaluate their answers, and conduct the study. To specifically evaluate and compare the probabilities of depression or anxiety among the diverse groups, the study used multiple logistic regression analysis and chose medical marijuana as the control group.
This type of study is the most revealing and inclusive, as it contains direct responses from a large number of participants. All tools in the form of questionnaires and scales have already been used and proved their efficacy for collecting analytical data. It helps to systematize and classify distinct kinds of information for subsequent uncomplicated services. Thus, researchers can compare the effects of medications on patients of diverse age groups, backgrounds, physical conditions, emotional states, and so on.
The analysis of any human reaction has a high potential of subjectiveness and bias.
The study included 890 participants, of which 474 were treated solely with opioids, 329 were treated with MM, and 77 were treated with placebo.
The study looked at the interdependence of various factors that affected the physical and emotional condition of patients.
The questionnaires used different variable measures to collect information. For example, it included comprehensive socio-demographic data: gender, age, country, type of residence (urban/rural), years of education, and employment status. Patients were also asked about their medical history over the years and the current presence of any severe diseases such as heart failure, diabetes, arthritis, and so on. The third measure of the questionnaire was indicated by information on any twelve-month and lifetime drug and alcohol consumption. In addition, the record included a pain measurement scale from 0 to 10 to evaluate discomfort feelings during the last month.
There were many disorders among patients in the opiate, medical marijuana, and mixed OPMM groups.
The high response rate is due to the weak focus of respondents who have overcome severe pain sensations and depression.