A special bonus for life insurance policies was declared on Tuesday by Britain's Britannic Assurance.
The payout will apply to all "with profits" policies in force on February 17, 1997. Details will be given with the 1996 bonus due to be announced next month.
The company discussed with the Department of Trade and Industry ownership of long-term assets and a way to distribute the surplus to shareholders.
Britannic has now agreed with the DTI that 902 million pounds of the excess assets within the long term fund can be attributable to shareholders.
The company said it would increase its dividend by 83 percent to 23 pence per share.
The news boosted Britannic shares, which jumped 71 pence, or nearly nine percent, at one stage before settling for a rise of 29 pence to 832.50.
The money attributable to shareholders forms part of total assets in the life funds which amounted to 5.682 billion pounds at the end of 1995.
Those assets were estimated to have risen by the end of 1996, Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw said, and updated figures would be released on March 18.
Britannic also announced a restructuring of its long-term funds and the results of a strategic review of its business.
The review will lead to new systems for sales management and premium collection.
The initiatives are expected to cut operating costs by around 25 million pounds, based on 1995 figures.
Britannic said it planned to build on its brand, investment management and distribution skills, financial strength and product development abilities to strengthen its position and improve value to policy and shareholders.
Restructuring the long-term fund will create two continuing "with profits" funds, one for its industrial branch and the other for the ordinary branch -- life and pensions business.
In the future, at least 90 percent of the surplus will be allocated each year to the profits policies.
Two separate non-profit sub funds have been created, one for life and the other for pensions, which will be owned by shareholders.
The shareholder transfer for 1996 will be increased by 23 million pounds following the declaration of the 209 million pound special bonus. ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)