The Chinese government has accused veteran dissident Wang Xizhe of crossing the border and INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals INRDeals
Wang, a well-known figure in the Chinese democracy movement, has been a thorn in the side of the ruling Communist Party for decades.
However, in December 2020, news emerged that Wang had managed to cross the border into Myanmar, where he had sought the help of local pro-democracy activists. It was reported that he was hoping to make his way to Thailand, where he planned to seek asylum.
The Chinese government has since accused Wang of violating its national security laws by leaving the country illegally and engaging in activities that could be harmful to the state. Chinese authorities have labeled Wang a "criminal suspect" and issued an international warrant for his arrest.
Wang was accused of breaking Chinese law by leaving the country illegally and engaging in activities that endanger national security, according to a statement released via state media.
The embassy went on to say that Wang had "colluded with foreign anti-China forces, accepting their support and funding, and stepping up his anti-China activities."
The statement also included a warning to anyone who had provided support to Wang during his escape from China. Chinese authorities said that they would "punish severely those who have been colluding with Wang Xizhe and provide relevant information on his whereabouts."
This latest move by the Chinese government has been criticized by human rights groups and pro-democracy activists, who say that it is just another example of Beijing's crackdown on dissent and freedom of expression.
"This is a clear attempt to intimidate those who dare to stand up against the Chinese government and speak the truth," said William Nee.
Nee went on to say that it was "deeply concerning" that the Chinese government was pursuing those who had helped Wang during his escape from China. "This is a clear violation of their basic human rights," he said.
The case has raised concerns among the pro-democracy movement, which has been grappling with its own political crisis since the military coup.
The ministry said that it had never received a request from the Chinese government to extradite someone.
In a statement released through his lawyer, Wang said that he was not afraid of the Chinese government and would continue to speak out for democracy and human rights in China.
"I believe that the Chinese people deserve freedom, democracy, and human rights," he said. "I will continue to fight for these values until they are achieved."