Introduction
In addition, leaders help ensure that activities run effectively during care.
Identification of Leadership
Leadership plays an integral role in the performance of an organization. It is defined as leading a group of people towards achieving a given objective (Keats, 2019). For example, leaders help solve disputes among health professionals or between patients and providers. They also assist in eliminating instances of workplace incivility such as bullying, biases, and other negative emotional responses (Keats, 2019). In addition, leaders ensure that followers can work in teams and acquire appropriate communication skills. As a result, leaders ensure that an organization runs effectively.
Appraisal of Leadership
The followers should learn from leaders, for example, how to solve disputes.
Identification of Safety
Safety is an important aspect of healthcare because it affects care outcomes. By definition, safety is a state of being free from any harm or danger. It can be the safety of patients or healthcare providers in a setting (Trinchero et al., 2019). It makes sure that providers’ actions, such as diagnosis and treatment, are free from errors. Safety also assists in the creation of a conducive working environment for providers. For instance, working in a clean environment ensures that nurses are free from harm that could be caused when they stay in unclean surroundings. Thus, the overall outcome of safety in a healthcare setting is providers delivering quality healthcare services to patients.
Appraisal of Safety
Safety appraisal involves aspects used to evaluate safety in a healthcare setting.
Impact on the Nurses’ Need to Use High-Level Clinical Judgment
The concept of leadership and safety influence nurses’ need to use high-level clinical judgment in a healthcare setting. First, nurses are mandated to ensure that patients get quality care. To achieve this, the nurses must use their clinical judgment. They are also required to know when and where to ask for opinions during care. Second, in safety, nurses should adhere to rigorous standards of care (Keats, 2019). Third, they are supposed to use evidence to provide care to patients. Finally, nurses should use the concepts learned in school and the resources available at the facility to ensure quality care. For instance, nurses should collaborate with other healthcare providers to make informed decisions during care.
The leadership of emerging health initiatives.
There are three things that need to be done to create a good working environment for nurses.
Emerging Health Initiatives – Safety
There are various emerging health initiatives as far as safety in healthcare is concerned. The first initiative is to ensure that nurses work in a safe environment and that patients are free from medical errors (Keats, 2019). The second initiative is conducting rigorous training on safety issues in healthcare. This involves making sure nurses understand the practices that promote safety. Finally, the third initiative is the creation of policies and safety standards to guide operations within healthcare. Safety standards help in directing and maintaining safe and clinically competent nursing operations. Therefore, safety will be attained in healthcare if nurses understand safety issues and appropriate safety standards guiding operations.
Communication is related to leadership and safety.
Communication is integral in the effective management of operations in a workplace. To advance communication, there is a need to cultivate trust between relevant stakeholders in healthcare, such as nurse leaders, nurses, and patients and their families (Daft & Marcic, 2019). Trust ensures that stakeholders are open and transparent during communication. The other way is to adopt appropriate infrastructure such as communication apps or use the latest technology to improve communication between stakeholders. Another way is by constantly training nurses to be effective communicators. For instance, nurses should have listening skills because it is essential in providing quality care to patients. Thus, effective communication can be attained when there is trust among providers; the facility has appropriate tools to support information sharing, and when providers are equipped with communication skills.
Conclusion
There is a link between leadership and safety in the workplace.