British National Lottery operator Camelot  LOTT.CN on Tuesday posted lower interim profits as income from scratchcard sales fell by over 450 million pounds ($750 million).
The National Lottery will have a second weekly draw on February 5 and will be held every Wednesday thereafter, according to the chief executive.
This compares with pre-tax profit of 36.2 million pounds and sales of 2.51 billion pounds in the same period a year ago.
Camelot's five shareholding companies -- Cadbury Schweppes, De La Rue, GTech UK, Racal Electronics and ICL shared a total dividend payount of 10 million pounds, up from 9.5 million.
Sales for the weekly National Lottery game rose two percent to 1.68 billion pounds. Two thirds of the adult population regularly buy tickets for the Saturday draw, an event which is televised live and has become a ritual for many Britons.
The sales of the "Instants" scratchcards fell from last year.
The decline in scratchcard sales was expected, as the initial enthusiasm generated by their introduction waned.
"Mirroring the experience of lotteries worldwide, sales of Instants have fallen since their launch and are now settled at around 17 million pounds per week," Chairman Sir George Russell said in a statement.
National Lottery game tickets should increase in sales by 15-20 percent after the second weekly draw.
In the first half of the year, 50 percent of the turnover was handed out in prize money, with 567 million pounds going to "Good Causes", including charities and projects in sports and the arts.
Camelot, which has been granted a seven-year licence, said that over 40 percent of turnover went to "Good Causes" and the governnment in duties, making it the world's most efficient lottery operator.
Profit after tax is just under one percent of total sales and Holley dismissed criticisms of Camelot's performance.
"I think we have a slight problem in this country with success," he said, adding that foreign lottery companies were bemused by the atacks on Camelot.
The group confirmed plans to set up The Camelot Foundation to support organisations helping the disadvantaged and disabled.